ARCH 1200 - Beginners Architecture Career Discovery Program: Two-week introduction to architecture for rising high school juniors and seniors includes morning programs and introductory lectures in history and theory of architecture, computing and simulation, freehand and extreme drawing, building ecologies, building conservation, and construction systems. There will be field trips and career counseling. Afternoons will have individually critiqueed (tutored) design studios, group and individual projects, reviews, and public presentation. Acts as an opportunity for career discovery to decide whether a design education in architecture is appropriate. Summer term annually. Dates TBA. 9:00 - 4:00 pm.When Offered: Summer term annually.
ARCH 1210 - Advanced Architecture Career Discovery Program: Similar structure as the Beginners program. The Advanced program will continue to cultivate design foundations explored in the Beginners course. Dates: TBA. 9:00 - 4:00 pm.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 1200.When Offered: Summer term annually.
ARCH 2150 - The Ethos of ArchitectureThis course will examine the spectrum of architectural phenomena and ideas without a specific chronology using examples ranging from antiquity to the contemporary world in western and non-western civilizations and produced in both vernacular and disciplinary cultures. An essential part of this course is to stimulate students curiosity about architecture and the larger world and introduce them to key issues of architecture regarding space, form, critique, technology, aesthetics, societal, and cultural contexts, etc. Crucial to this goal is to encourage students to pursue and develop their own unique vision and voice in architecture throughout their education and practice. Fundamental to this process is making students aware of the necessity to challenge their own subjectivities, biases, and presuppositions.
ARCH 2160 - Architectural Media: This course continues the inquiry begun in ARCH 2150 The Ethos of Architecture and focuses especially on the implications that various media and means of representation have on the breadth of concerns within the history, theory, and critical practices of architecture and especially the generation of architecture.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4090 Architectural Case StudiesWhen Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 2330 - Structures 1: Introduction to Structures introduces the student of Architecture to the principles of structural mechanics and their application to basic architectural structures comprised primarily of wood. The fundamentals of statics are presented in order to gain an understanding of the way in which external forces produce internal stresses in individual members and, in essence, flow through the building system to be resolved at the foundation level. The principles of strength of materials are studied to understand how particular structural materials and configurations manage to resist these forces without unacceptable distortions, or even failure. Wood structural properties are studied in all their complexity as a means to internalize the more theoretical topics broached. Through in-class presentations, reading, homework and project work, computer lab, field trips, and case studies, the student will be aided in developing this intuitive (while practical) understanding. It is recognized that intuitions of building technologies are not acquired quickly but result from much study, observation, and practice. Introduction to Structures makes use of the several approaches above to ensure that the beginning student is provided with a broad, solid base for future structural investigations. WebCT will be used to expand the students access to course materials and allow for a measure of distance learning. Sustainability: The following notions are introduced as important attributes of sustainable structures and construction: durability and service life and life cycle cost.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2510 except M.Arch. students.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 2350 - Construction Systems: Construction Systems centers on the development of a technical knowledge of, sensibility to, and intuition for the process by which an architectural design is realized in built form. The interdependence among building materials, acoustic qualities, enclosure systems, interior, finish, and other systems is investigated, with an emphasis on the broader architectural design endeavor. Drawing as a means of understanding forms the basis for a semester-long project to be done in small groups. Case studies will center on concepts and systems that have not yet found their way into mainstream practice. The course approach will involve in-class presentations, project work, field trips, and case studies. WebCT will be used to expand the students access to course materials and allow for a measure of distance learning. Sustainability: The notion that design intentions can be nullified through incorrect construction is stressed. The importance of proper detailing, construction, and maintenance to accomplish lasting and efficient enclosures is highlighted. Skills to diagnose and treat incorrect construction are developed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2510 except M.Arch. students.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 2360 - Environmental and Ecological Systems: An exploration of the fundamental principles of human physiology, thermal and luminous comfort, and indoor quality. Emphasis is on bioclimatic and psychrometric climate analysis and its relationship to architectural design, understanding the energy exchange between body in space, the natural meaning of enclosures, and nonstructural materials and systems. The focus is on passive heating, cooling, and daylighting systems and their design. Exercises include vital sign analysis of existing spaces (thermal, air, luminous), forming hypotheses of building performance, using scientific instrumentation, tenant survey techniques, and physical modeling and simulation techniques related to daylighting and shading techniques.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: PHYS 1500, ARCH 2820, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 2370 - Energy, Comfort and Ecology: This course addresses fundamental principles relating the environmental context to human needs and comfort. Topics include the principles of thermodynamics at the architectural scale, optimization versus variability, principles of building sites and orientations, psychometrics, and human comfort, and an introduction to energy modeling. This course is required of all students in the B.Arch. degree program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 2360 Environmental and Ecological SystemsWhen Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 2510 - Materials and Design: This course establishes an understanding of the most common materials, their properties and resulting uses, and the implications of their uses in the larger context of material life cycles. The structural makeup of metals, ceramics, polymers, and composite materials is discovered and their resulting properties, costs, and life cycle consequences are clarified. An understanding of basic mechanical properties is established hands on by conducting tension, compression, and 3-point bending tests (mse-lab). Physical performance of material constructs as synergy between form and material properties is further illustrated. Experiments are conducted that introduce such major concepts as structural loading, properties of sections, and resulting system performance. Sustainability: The concept of life cycles is introduced; material and energy flows are tracked throughout the entire material life cycle. This will be accomplished alongside introducing major material groupings (metals, polymers, ceramics, and composites). Students come to realize that environmental concerns are directly related to structural composition and material availability. Consequences of resource extraction, distribution, manipulation, use, and disposal, reuse or recycle are addressed at both local and global scales. Selected field trips to materials extraction, processing, manufacturing, disposal, and recycling facilities are aimed to give physical meaning to the concept of life cycle.When Offered: Fall and summer annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 2520 - Digital Constructs 1: This course will examine and teach methods of representation and the communication of design concepts. Skills taught will enable students to produce two-dimensional and three-dimensional digital models, as well as drawings from multiple perspectives. Students will understand virtual environments as they pertain to model making, drawing, scale, and materiality.  Students will be introduced to digital modeling and graphic design softwares. This course is offered in the fall semester and is required of all first-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program. Coordination of the relationship of course content to Architectural Design Studio 1 will be between the Digital Constructs 1 faculty instructor and the first-year architectural design studio coordinator and faculty.  Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: Corequisites: ARCH 2800 Architectural Design Studio 1.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 2530 - Digital Constructs 2: This course builds upon topics covered in Digital Constructs 1 by focusing upon contemporary means of producing and communicating architectural ideas. Students will use digital methodologies through all phases of a project as well as advanced representation and digital fabrication techniques. The use of digital modeling as a sketch and iterative tool will be emphasized. Tools taught in Digital Constructs 2 will build upon those software programs taught in Digital Constructs 1. This course is required of all first-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program. Coordination of the relationship of course content to Architectural Design Studio 2 will be between the Digital Constructs 2 faculty instructor and the first-year architectural design studio coordinator and faculty.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2540 Digital Constructs 3; corequisite: ARCH 2810 Architectural Design Studio 2.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 2540 - Digital Constructs 3: This course introduces computational and procedural design approaches that are a logical extension to topics covered in Digital Constructs 2. Students will develop an understanding of computational logic through introductory design applications, both as advanced tooling and as generative design techniques. Methodological approaches will be contextualized by a presentation of historical and theoretical precedents. Techniques introduced will include scripting, Java, geospatial mapping. This course is offered in the fall semester and is required of all second-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program. Coordination of the relationship of course content to Architectural Design Studio 3 will be between the Digital Constructs 3 faculty instructor and the second-year architectural design studio coordinator and faculty.  Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2550 Digital Constructs 2, Corequisite: ARCH 2820 Architectural Design 3.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 2550 - Digital Constructs 4: Building on techniques taught in Digital Constructs 3, this course will expand upon the role of technology in architecture by introducing advanced methods of design analysis and resolution. Students will learn to address issues of optimization, environmental surroundings, structure, and site by using various contemporary analytic softwares. This course is offered in the spring semester and is required of all second-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program. Coordination of the relationship of course content to Architectural Design Studio 4 will be between the Digital Constructs 4 faculty instructor and the second-year architectural design studio coordinator and faculty.  Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2540 Digital Constructs 3 and ARCH 4820 Comprehensive Design Studio; corequisite: ARCH 2830 Architectural Design 4.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 2600 - Graduate Design Studio: Design studio introducing students to general design through a series of short projects. The projects stress critical and creative thinking and invention, interdisciplinary collaboration, observation and perception, communication and visualization. Students will begin open-ended investigations using sketching, photography, model making, and computing.When Offered: Summer and fall terms annually.Credit Hours: 6
ARCH 2610 - Graduate Architecture Design 1: Design studio introducing students to the processes of critical inquiry specifically as it relates to architecture investigations. These processes are seen as interrelated and always informed by the societal, technological, and historical contexts within which architects work. Parallel instruction in drawing, computing, and construction technology are integrated within the work of this studio. Technology: The technology aspects focus on discovering the basic systems used to create space, such as structural systems, enclosure types, and systems for movement. Emphasis is placed upon constructability and sustainability. These discoveries are through hands-on applications and field visits. Computing: Explorations with the computer focus on both the development of a fundamental knowledge of 3-D modeling and 2-D image manipulation software and a nontraditional application of this knowledge to design representations. The computer media (3-D modeling “space,” computer printouts, video projections) are conceived of as yet another “physical” material for experimentation, and are integrated in this way with the studio design projects. Drawing: The drawing segment consists of freehand drawing exercises that relate to studio projects and help students develop basic drawing skills and a familiarity with 2-D design concepts.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2600.When Offered: Spring and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 6
ARCH 2620 - Graduate Architecture Design 2: A continuation of the pursuit of architecture as critical inquiry within a broad societal context. Instruction integrates considerations of drawing, computers, and construction with design projects. Technology: The technology aspects focus on the microclimate and environment context, including shade and shadow analysis, developing skyline plots, and sharing system design and analysis, as well as outdoor environments with emphasis on structure, material, and passive solar systems. Computing: explorations with the computer continue to focus on developing knowledge of 3-D modeling and 2-D image manipulation software and its application to design representations. Computer media are integrated with studio design projects. Drawing: freehand drawing exercises related to studio projects further develop basic drawing skills and familiarly with 2-D design concepts.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2610.When Offered: Fall and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 6
ARCH 2630 - Graduate Architecture Design 3: Graduate Design Studio 3 develops practices that focus on the relationship between specific architectural design situations and issues of representation; conceptual, analytical, and critical thinking; ethical dilemmas; and the role that technical issues play in space-making.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2620.When Offered: Spring and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 6
ARCH 2800 - Architectural Design Studio 1: This course introduces students to design as a way of thinking, creating, and making through a series of short projects. The projects stress critical and creative thinking and invention, interdisciplinary collaboration, observation and perception, communication and visualization. Using sketching, photography, model making, and computing students pursue open-ended investigations of form, space, materials, and the ideas that both generate and are generated by them. This course is required of all first-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch.  program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 2810 Architectural Design Studio 2, Corequisite: ARCH 2520 Digital Constructs 1.When Offered: Fall and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 2810 - Architectural Design Studio 2: This course continues the processes of critical inquiry in relation to design and design creativity through a series of hands-on projects that incorporate fundamental issues of technology, materiality, abstraction, tectonics, and theory that consider the array of architectural issues in the design of built environments that consider architecture in a wider sense that includes its involvement with site, context, situation, and simple program. This course is required of all first-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch.  program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 2820 Architectural Design Studio 3, Corequisite: ARCH 2530 Digital Constructs 2.When Offered: Spring and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 2820 - Architectural Design Studio 3: This studio focuses on the relationship between building and landscape in terms of conceptual, pragmatic, ideological, aesthetic, and functional issues. As such, it endeavors to examine critically the disciplinary boundary between building and landscape. It also critically assesses the connections and inherent complexities between an institutional situation, workplace activity, and residential inhabitation in order to explore questions of publicness and privacy. This studio also addresses the tectonic dimensions of construction and structure in architectural design. This course is required of all second-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 2830 Architectural Design 4, Corequisite: ARCH 2540 Digital Constructs 3.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 2830 - Architectural Design Studio 4: This design studio builds on prior studios emphasizing projects of greater scale and complexity. Typically, the studio designs large-scale housing developments but other projects of similar complexity may be used. The studio requires the analysis and critique of precedent and the writing of an architectural program. This course is offered in the spring semester and is required of all second-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 4820 Comprehensive Design Studio, ARCH 4830 Design Development Studio, and ARCH 4770 Architectural Design Studio 5; corequisite: ARCH 2550 Digital Constructs 4.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 2850 - Building Performance Studio 1: This studio considers the design of architectural form and space from the perspective of how the many factors of environmental and ecological forces give shape to them. The studio will employ architectural design projects as a means to explore these issues qualitatively and quantitatively. This course is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.S. in Building Sciences program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2860 Building Performance Studio 2.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 2860 - Building Performance Studio 2: This studio continues the work of the Building Performance Studio 2 to consider in greater depth and detail the design of architectural form and space from the perspective of how the many factors of environmental and ecological forces give shape to them. The studio will employ architectural design projects as a means to explore these issues qualitatively and quantitatively. This course is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.S. in Building Sciences program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 4530 Building Sciences Capstone.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 2940 - Projects in Architecture and Environmental Design: Individual projects and readings adapted to the needs of individual students.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
ARCH 2960 - Topics in Architecture and Environmental Design: Experimental courses tried out in one or two terms as the general program requires.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ARCH 4010 - Seminar in Sensory Culture: This seminar examines human perception from a designers perspective. It draws on perspectives from the sciences, arts, and humanities in order to build an understanding of how people perceive and interact with the environments they create. One cannot only read about perception; the seminar will augment reading with a range of direct experiences as source material for discussion.  When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4020 - Bedford Architecture Engineering Seminar: This interdisciplinary seminar consists of students from both the School of Architecture and Civil Engineering department. Presentation of a variety of structural typologies bears direct relation to practical experience and the necessity for constructive interdisciplinary discourse. Specific structural typologies are examined through historic and contemporary project examples that are critically deconstructed and critically analyzed with respect to their basic engineering principles and architectural concepts. Students will be exposed to the collaborative methods inherent within the architect/engineer relationship. The course consists of lectures concerning each topic, case studies and presentations of relevant projects, an interdisciplinary design project and discussion of the projects and presentations with respect to interdisciplinary discourse. Content and delivery may vary by instructor. Taught with CIVL 4020. Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 2330 Strucutres 1.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: CIVL 4020.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 4050 - Cities and Their Territories: An important ancillary concern throughout the previous eight courses of the history, theory, and criticism sequence has been the examination of architecture as a fundamental part of the forces of urbanization and humanitys interventions into the landscape and environment. This course highlights the perspective of that dimension of architectural understanding by examining in detail both historically and contemporarily many of the most significant ways that human habitation has engaged the world at the large scale of cities and geographies. This 2-credit course is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4070 - Twisted Siblings: Relationships Between Contemporary Painting and Digital Architecture: Architecture and painting are two of the oldest forms of societal expression and have been historically linked in complex and dynamic ways. In the 20th century, the movements of Cubism, Futurism, Neo-Plasticism, Constructivism, Purism, Surrealism and Dadaism consisted of dynamic dialogs between architecture and painting. These exchanges allowed each to have a profound and deep impact upon the other. By contrast, in early 21st century, there seems to be all but a mute relationship between the two. This course intends to help break that silence. This course will begin to bridge the divide by establishing new connections between the current preoccupations with materials, procedures, and affects that are emerging in both, contemporary painting and architecture. Twisted Siblings seeks to explore and discover new relationships between the most cutting-edge digital technologies and how painting may influence the expressive capacities of these technologies. As contemporary painting and architecture seek to establish future directions, a new dialog and exchange of ideas should be emerging, to ensure a dynamic and radical future for both. The course will consist of a series of lectures, discussions, and presentations. Students will be expected to research a number of individual architects, painters, and writers who are producing work of related interest. Students will be responsible for completing a research project, which synthesizes the content of the course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4090 - Architectural Case Studies: Works of architecture embody knowledge, ideas, and imagination that express formally, spatially, and materially the ways of living and values of the civilizations in which they occur. In continuing the inquiry begun in The Ethos of Architecture and employing the skills and values acquired in that course and Architectural Media, the intent of this course is to teach students the means for investigating buildings coherently, rationally, and interpretively to understand the technical and cultural knowledge embedded within works of architecture. A select number of modern and contemporary buildings that represent a high degree of sophistication in the way their architects have approached the breadth of design issues both within and external to the programs of those works will be analyzed critically in order to ascertain the significance and relationships of the multiple systems of order inherent to a work of architecture.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4120 Modernity in Culture, Civilization, and Architecture 1.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4100 - An Architectural Genealogy 1: This course addresses the history of architectural and related developments in selected Western and non-Western civilizations in order to construct a conceptual and strategic understanding of the relationships between architecture, culture, technology, and thought. In doing so, it will focus on key constructed spatial phenomena of the pre-modern world and where relevant elucidate the connection of these works of architecture and their motivating ideals to those of the modern and contemporary world.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4110 An Architectural Genealogy 2.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4110 - An Architectural Genealogy 2: This course addresses the history of architectural and related developments in selected Western and non-Western civilizations in order to construct a conceptual and strategic understanding of the relationships between architecture, culture, technology, and thought. In doing so, it will focus on key constructed spatial phenomena of the pre-modern world and, where relevant, elucidate the connection of these works of architecture and their motivating ideals to those of the modern and contemporary world.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4150 Contemporary Design Approaches.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4120 - Modernity in Culture, Civilization, and Architecture 1: Building on the knowledge, critical perspectives, and abilities that students have acquired in the previous courses in the history, theory, and criticism sequence, this course along with its successor, ARCH 4130 Modernity in Culture, Civilization, and Architecture 2, begins a study of the ideas, values, theories, and practices that contributed to the rise of modernity in the western world and eventually on a global scale. This course explores the ideal of modernity as both a cultural phenomenon as it emerged in the Enlightenment with ideas of progress, the technological enframing of the world, scientific rationality, historical consciousness, etc.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4130 Modernity in Culture, Civilization, and Architecture 2.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4130 - Modernity in Culture, Civilization, and Architecture 2: Building on the knowledge, critical perspectives, and abilities that students have acquired in the previous history, theory, and criticism courses, this course continues the study begun in ARCH 4120 Modernity in Culture, Civilization, and Architecture 1 of the ideas, values, theories, and practices that contributed to the rise of modernity in the western world and eventually on a global scale. This course explores the ideal of modernity as both a cultural phenomenon as it emerged in the Enlightenment with ideas of progress, the technological enframing of the world, scientific rationality, historical consciousness, etc.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4100 An Architectural Genealogy 1.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4140 - Modernity in Culture and Architecture: An exploration of the idea of modernity as both a cultural phenomenon (extending back to Enlightenment ideas of progress, technological enframing of the world, scientific rationality, historical consciousness, etc.) and as an artistic/architectural discourse unfolding in the 20th century as a radical requestioning of all traditional concepts of program, construction, and aesthetics. As such, this is both a theory and a history course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 4150 - Contemporary Design Approaches: Reflecting on the knowledge and understandings acquired in all the previous courses in the history, theory, and criticism sequence, this course is a critical inquiry into the principal ideologies and premises of the most substantive architectural practices in the contemporary world. As such, the content of the course must necessarily evolve as the intellectual and cultural parameters of both theory and practice in the contemporary world change. The principal aim of the critique of various contemporary positions is to reinforce in students the importance of developing and critically maintaining their own values, vision, and voice in the design and making of architecture that was initiated in ARCH 2150 The Ethos of Architecture. Fundamental to this process is to encourage the students awareness of the necessity to challenge their own subjectivities, biases, and presuppositions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 4050 Cities and Their Territories.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4160.80 - Research Investigations: Project Built Ecologies: This class is taken by professional students from the School of Architectures Troy campus accepted into the one-semester visiting program at CASE in NYC. The course is structured to integrate visiting students into ongoing research at CASE by forming cohort groups that work directly with in-resident Ph.D. students. Architectural research methods are explored throughout the semester and include; case studies, modeling, simulation, and prototyping of building systems. The course consists of topical lectures, and discussions regarding progress of ongoing research projects.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 4170.80 - Environmental Parametrics: The work of this course sets out to describe the meaning, values, and methods of using parametric techniques as both an analytical tool and a generative device in comprehensive performance-based building design. The students learn techniques to set-up feedback between analysis and tactical response in performance-based design while also situating these techniques within the broader discourse and methodology of fostering design ecologies and creating ecologies of design as they relate to the construction of the built environment and contemporary issues of sustainability. This course is offered at the Center for Architectural Science + Ecology (CASE) in NYC to B.Arch. students who have been selected to participate in the semester-long, off-campus study program at CASE in NYC.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4260 - Architecture Design 6: A series of upper-level design studios that focus on significant concerns in architecture.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 6
ARCH 4300 - Design Development: A technology-based design studio emphasizing the materialization and making of architectural design projects. The integration of building code requirements for fire protection, life safety, accessibility, building environmental systems, structure, construction, and materiality is central to effectively achieving design intent. Students become aware of how these affect and inform design decisions. They learn to integrate technology, systems, and materials in the comprehensive resolution of building design and gain exposure to construction documents and design documentation. Construction and site visits are an integral part of the studio as is an integrated electronic media seminar on CAD applications. Students must coregister for ARCH 4540, a concurrent two-credit course that introduces codes, the regulatory process, agreements, contract documents, building design cost control, and administration. This course maybe taken any time after ARCH 4820.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ARCH 4820, ARCH 4330. ARCH 4740 may be taken as a prerequisite or corequisite. It is recommended that ARCH 4740 be deferred one semester for students studying abroad only (ex: China) and take ARCH 2360 as a corequisite.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 6
ARCH 4330 - Structures 2: This course builds on the material presented in Structures 1, with an emphasis on the analysis and design of structures compressed primarily of steel and site cast and pre-cast concrete, with an overview of load-bearing masonry and advanced systems. The theoretical concepts covered in the introduction course form the conceptual basis for work in Structures 2, with relevant new concepts/techniques covered. Innovative, non-normative structural systems are investigated and discussed. Analysis and design will proceed using primarily computer-aided techniques. The course approach will involve in-class presentations, homework and project work, computer lab, field trips, and case studies. WebCT will be used to expand the students access to course materials and allow for a measure of distance learning. Sustainability: The following notions are introduced as important attributes of sustainable structures and construction: structural robustness, and programmatic flexibility. (Design optimization approaches are introduced and explored as avenues to accomplish more optimum design conditions under increasingly strict design constraints.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ARCH 2510 except M.Arch. students, ARCH 2350, ARCH 2330.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 4340 - Structural Morphology: This is a research-based course that examines the structural behavior of various complex systems and complex forms in the context of their performance. Innovative and emerging structural topologies are of special interest. A form-finding investigation and exploration will include computer evaluation, load testing of physical models, and laser scanning of the geometry to feed back into the computer models. In addition, the course will address fragility and robustness estimates. This work is individual or a group research project that may continue work from previous years. The course will also allow for architectural and structural explorations driven by specific student interests.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4360 - Graduate Architecture Design 4: An upper level design studio emphasizing the interacting combinations of dynamic influences arising from both global and local scales in the design of portions of the urban landscape, usually including some substantial housing component as well as facilities for the public realm.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2630.When Offered: Fall and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 6
ARCH 4510 - Construction Industry Seminar 1: This course introduces the construction industry as an essential context for realizing architecture. It is a survey of the people, organizations, and professional and industry groups involved in design, construction, finance, insurance, and regulation of building. Current issues influencing design quality are identified by the class and are explored in a series of student-organized in-depth seminars with industry participants. This is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.S. in Building Sciences program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4520 Construction Industry Seminar 2.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4520 - Construction Industry Seminar 2This course continues the examination of the diverse and interconnected aspects of the construction industry as an essential context for realizing architecture. It surveys the history and current developments of the people, organizations, and professional and industry groups involved in design, construction, finance, insurance, and regulation of building. Current issues influencing design quality are identified by the class and are explored in a series of student-organized in-depth seminars with industry participants. This is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.S. in Building Sciences program.
ARCH 4530 - Building Sciences Capstone: This course offers the students the opportunity to demonstrate a comprehensive knowledge of issues and practices in an important subject within the building sciences through a self-initiated and faculty-directed independent design, research, or research/design project. This is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.S. in Building Sciences program.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 4540 - Professional Practice 1: An introduction to architectural practice as related to accomplishing design projects. An overview of professional obligations, registration and conduct, architects roles in project delivery, and office organization and management for delivering professional services. In-depth examination of architects responsibilities for health, safety, and welfare in design; building code requirements for fire protection, life safety, and accessibility; economics of building systems and assemblies; design and construction contracts; and design documentation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: Students in ARCH 4830 Design Development are required to coregister.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4550 - Professional Practice 2This course covers topics that are essential to developing an effective professional architectural practice. The course will address professional obligations and ethics, contracts, registration, office organization, and management. The course will emphasize effective communication, negotiating, public speaking and team development.
ARCH 4560 - Materials and Enclosures: In a world of rapid technological change, this course aims to equip future architects with the ability to position, understand, and implement new materials and systems in meaningful ways. The working principles of selected advanced materials and systems are explained and issues of material development, applications, and integration into buildings systems are addressed. Emphasis is also placed on understanding the issues involved when combining and installing new materials or systems into buildings. Students are further introduced to detail development. Sustainability: New materials and systems are explored with the objective of formulating meaningful technological response to critical environmental and societal issues such as resource depletion, environmental degradation, and globalization.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ARCH 2510 except M.Arch. students, and ARCH 2350.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4580.80 - Materials Systems and Productions: The goal of Material Systems and Production is threefold: to develop a fundamental understanding of materials through first principles, classification, production, and impacts, to develop models for material properties and testing, and to develop criteria to make reasoned choices for the implementation of materials in the built environment. Students will engage directed research projects with the intent of opportunistically identifying intrinsic material properties, exploiting production-forming logics and developing a prototype detail assembly for testing.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 4590 - Economics and Architecture: Economic issues related to the practice of architecture. Topics will include economic cycles and building construction, globalization of architectural practice, case studies of models of practice, setting and negotiation of fees for services, economic relationships of architects and consultants, cost estimation. This course is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program.When Offered: Sping term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4690 - Case Studies: Investigations into Architectural Knowledge: “The best instructor of allis a building which is being pulled down.” (John Willis Clark, “On the Construction of the Vaults of the Middle Ages,” 1842). Buildings embody cultural knowledge. Their forms and spaces are invested with traces of habitation and beliefs through the employment of materials that are wrought by craft and technology. It is the intention of this course to teach how to investigate buildings in order to reveal the technological and cultural knowledge that is embedded within them. In this course, a select number of significant buildings are “disassembled” through intense questioning, and their artifactual significance is probed through careful analysis.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  ARCH 4140, ARCH 4330 and ARCH  4560; A pre or corequisite to ARCH 4300.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 4730 - Sustainable Building Design Strategies: This course addresses an exploration of design strategies that produce environmentally responsible buildings. A review of the principles for a variety of green strategies will be presented. Case studies will be employed to demonstrate best practices in the design integration of green strategies. The material covered can be incorporated into a studio design development course. When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4740 - Building Systems and Environment: Design analysis and performance characteristics of building environmental systems, emphasizing heating, cooling, ventilation, and lighting systems. In addition, building electrical systems, acoustics, water, waste, and drainage systems are covered in terms of fundamental theory, designs, and calculations. Case studies, field trips, and system design project work are required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 2360.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 4750 - Sustainable Building Design Metrics: A review of current and anticipated metrics associated with sustainable building design will be reviewed as well as construction practices in the building industry will be discussed. How sustainable design practices can mitigate the climate change in a positive way will be reviewed. An understanding of energy terminology is useful for this course. Lectures, discussions, field trips, and assigned reading will be utilized to explore the subject matter.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4730 Sustainable Building Design Strategies.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 4770 - Architectural Design Studio 5: This is an upper division architectural design studio that explores topics of contemporary interest to the discipline. Students apply for this studio based on their personal interest and professional objectives. Three such studios Architectural Design Studio 5, Architectural Design Studio 6, and Architectural Design Studio 7, are required for the degree. This course is offered in the fall and spring semesters and is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 2830 Architectural Design Studio 4, and ARCH 4780 Architectural Design Studio 6.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 4780 - Architectural Design Studio 6: This is an upper division architectural design studio that explores topics of contemporary interest to the discipline. Students apply for this studio based on their personal interest and professional objectives. Three such studios Architectural Design Studio 5, Architectural Design Studio 6, and Architectural Design Studio 7, are required for the degree. This course is offered in the fall and spring semesters and is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4790 Architectural Design Studio 7.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 4790 - Architectural Design Studio 7This is an upper division architectural design studio that explores topics of contemporary interest to the discipline. Students apply for this studio based on their personal interest and professional objectives. Three such studios: Architectural Design Studio 5, Architectural Design Studio 6, and Architectural Design Studio 7, are required for the degree. This course is offered in the fall semester and is required of all first-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program.
ARCH 4820 - Integrated Design SchematicThis studio is a design-based studio that focuses on the integration of structural, technical, detail, zoning, and code-related issues with respect to the design of a moderate to large-scale building of civic importance. Such building types are (but not limited to) libraries, theaters, city halls, judicial buildings, educational buildings, etc. An important focus of the design project will be the relationship of the building to its urban context. An essential part of the design will involve programming of the building as well as responding to numerous of the learning outcomes defined by the NAAB (the accrediting agency for professional architecture programs) for a comprehensive design project.
ARCH 4830 - Integrated Design Development: This studio is a technology-based design studio emphasizing the materialization and making of architectural design projects. The integration of building code requirements for fire protection, life safety, accessibility, building environmental systems, structure, construction, and materiality is central to the effective achievement of design intent. Students become aware of how these issues affect and inform design decisions. They learn to integrate technology, systems, and materials in the comprehensive resolution of building design and gain exposure to construction documents and design documentation. Construction and site visits are an integral part of the studio as is an integrated electronic media seminar on CAD applications. Students must coregister for ARCH 4540 Professional Practice 1, a concurrent 2-credit course that introduces codes, the regulatory process, agreements, contract documents, building design cost control, and administration. This course is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4920 Final Project Design Studio, Corequisite: ARCH 4540 Professional Practice 1.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 4840 - Architectural Acoustics 1: This course provides an overview of the essentials for architectural acoustics design of performance and public spaces, including concert halls, theaters, museums, classrooms, sports arenas, courtrooms, and religious buildings. There are no prerequisites, but the course may be used as the starting point for a certificate in Architectural Acoustics, a concentration in an architecture student’s professional electives, or the beginning of a master’s degree in acoustics. The course covers basic principles of sound, room acoustics, sound absorption in rooms, sound isolation and privacy, acoustics of mechanical systems, and sound quality. After both Architectural Acoustics 1 and 2, the student should be prepared for a basic entry-level position in either acoustics in architecture or in acoustical consulting.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 4850 - Architectural Acoustics 2: In the spring semester, students will have the opportunity to design their own performance hall. This process will include continued studies of acoustics measurements, simulated sound fields, community noise issues, and professional practice in acoustics consulting. The course will also have detailed lectures on concert hall acoustics, sound quality, and synthesized sound fields. Students will be introduced to a variety of simulation software and measurement equipment in the Acoustics Research Laboratory. After both Architectural Acoustics 1 and 2, the student should be prepared for a basic entry-level position in either acoustics in architecture or in acoustical consulting.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 4840 or instructor approval.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 4860 - Applied Psychoacoustics: Topics include the functional overview of the auditory system, loudness, pitch, and timbre perception, masking, binaural hearing, auditory scene analysis, multi-modal integration, and auditory perception in rooms. Required signal processing methods will be covered as well. Course taught with ARCH 6860.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 4910 - Final Project Design Research Seminar: This seminar is the first required course of the two-semester, 5th-year Final Project course sequence in the undergraduate program and as such serves as a prerequisite to the spring semester ARCH 4920 Final Project Design Studio. The Design Research Seminar provides a forum for readings and discussions as well as design and/or material experimentation as it relates to the respective Final Project instructors thematic framework. The seminar also covers fundamentals related to standard methods of research and analysis. This 3-credit course is required of all architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4920 Final Project Design Studio.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 4920 - Final Project Design Studio: This design studio is the second required course of the two-semester, 5th-year Final Project course sequence in the undergraduate program. The Final Project Design Studio provides a forum for the design and development of a comprehensive architectural proposal pertinent to the Final Project course sequence. This course is required of all first-year architecture undergraduates in the B.Arch. program. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 4910 Final Project Design Research Seminar.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 4940 - Advanced Individual Projects in Architecture and Environmental Design: Individual projects and readings adapted to the needs of individual students at the advanced level.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
ARCH 4960 - Special Topics in Architecture and Environmental Design: Experimental courses tried out in one or two terms as the general program requires.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ARCH 4980 - B.Arch. Final Project 1: In the context of a faculty directed design research area, students initiate, research, and plan a comprehensive project that creatively engages the material inhabited world. The FP1 semester is research intensive and the first of the two-semester Final Project sequence. The semester includes a research/methods seminar that is common to all students. The integrated design research phase is executed under the guidance of a final project studio professor in a studio context. In that phase, each student initiates, prepares, and develops a project for completion in ARCH 4990 Final Project 2. For students in the B.Arch. program only. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 4981 - Methods Seminar: Situated within the context of the Final Project (ARCH 4980) directed research studio sequence, this course addresses general methods of design research with an emphasis on studying the ways in which the discipline of architecture engages other fields of knowledge. Through a series of historical and contemporary writings as well as specific precedents in architectural design, it will look at how the discipline of architecture has absorbed external disciplinary, technological, and cultural influences as a means of advancing itself in the world.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: Students in ARCH 4980 are required to coregister.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
ARCH 4990 - B.Arch. Final Project 2: The final phase of B.Arch. Final Project culminates in a comprehensive investigation manifested in a design project that engages the material inhabited world. Students continue the integrated design research phase of an approved project that was initiated in Final Project 1 (ARCH 4980) and complete its design under the guidance of a final project studio professor.  For students in the B.Arch. program only. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 4980.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 6
ARCH 5100 - History, Theory, Criticism 1: This course addresses the history of architectural and related developments in selected Western and non-Western civilizations in order to construct a conceptual and strategic understanding of the relationships between architecture, culture, technology, and thought. In doing so, it will focus on key constructed spatial phenomena of the pre-modern world and where relevant elucidate the connection of these works of architecture and their motivating ideals to those of the modern and contemporary world. This course will also explore the history of the ideas, values, theories, and practices that contributed to the rise of modernity in the western world and eventually on a global scale. This course investigates the ideal of modernity as both a cultural phenomenon as it emerged in the Enlightenment with ideas of progress, the technological enframing of the world, scientific rationality, historical consciousness, etc. This course is required of all architecture graduate students in the M.Arch. program.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 5110 - History, Theory, Criticism 2: This course addresses the history of architectural and related developments in selected Western and non-Western civilizations in order to construct a conceptual and strategic understanding of the relationships between architecture, culture, technology, and thought. In doing so, it will focus on key constructed spatial phenomena of the pre-modern world and where relevant elucidate the connection of these works of architecture and their motivating ideals to those of the modern and contemporary world. This course builds upon the pre-modern precedents to examine the ideas, values, theories, and practices that contributed to the rise of modernity in the western world and eventually on a global scale. This course explores the ideal of modernity as both a cultural phenomenon as it emerged in the Enlightenment with ideas of progress, the technological enframing of the world, scientific rationality, historical consciousness, etc. This course is required of all architecture graduate students in the M.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5100.When Offered: Spring term anually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 5140 - Structures 1: Introduction to Structures introduces the student of Architecture to the principles of structural mechanics and their application to basic architectural structures comprised primarily of wood. The fundamentals of statics are presented in order to gain an understanding of the way in which external forces produce internal stresses in individual members and, in essence, flow through the building system to be resolved at the foundation level. The principles of strength of materials are studied to understand how particular structural materials and configurations manage to resist these forces without unacceptable distortions, or even failure. Wood structural properties are studied in all their complexity as a means to internalize the more theoretical topics broached. Through in-class presentations, reading, homework and project work, computer lab, field trips, and case studies, the student will be aided in developing this intuitive (while practical) understanding. It is recognized that intuitions of building technologies are not acquired quickly but result from much study, observation, and practice. Introduction to Structures makes use of the several approaches above to ensure that the beginning student is provided with a broad, solid base for future structural investigations. WebCT will be used to expand the students access to course materials and allow for a measure of distance learning. Sustainability: The following notions are introduced as important attributes of sustainable structures and construction: durability and service life, and life cycle cost. This course is required of all architecture graduate students in the M.Arch. program.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 5150 - Structures 2: This course builds on the material presented in Structures 1, with an emphasis on the analysis and design of structures compressed primarily of steel and site cast and pre-cast concrete, with an overview of load-bearing masonry and advanced systems. The theoretical concepts covered in the introduction course form the conceptual basis for work in Structures 2, with relevant new concepts/techniques covered. Innovative, non-normative structural systems are investigated and discussed. Analysis and design will proceed using primarily computer-aided techniques. The course approach will involve in-class presentations, homework and project work, computer lab, field trips, and case studies. WebCT will be used to expand the students access to course materials and allow for a measure of distance learning. Sustainability: The following notions are introduced as important attributes of sustainable structures and construction: structural robustness, and programmatic flexibility. (Design optimization approaches are introduced and explored as avenues to accomplish more optimum design conditions under increasingly strict design constraints.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5140.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 5160 - Digital Constructs 1: This course focuses upon contemporary means of producing and communicating architectural ideas. Students will use digital methodologies through all phases of a project as well as advanced representation and digital fabrication techniques. The use of digital modeling as a sketch and iterative tool will be emphasized.  Tools taught in Digital Constructs 1 will support softwares taught in Digital Constructs 2. This course is required of all first-year architecture graduate students in the M.Arch. program. Coordination of the relationship of course content to Graduate Architecture Design 1 will be between the Digital Constructs 1 faculty instructor and the architectural design studio coordinator and faculty.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 5170 - Digital Constructs 2: Building on techniques taught in Digital Constructs 1, this course will expand upon the role of technology in architecture by introducing advanced methods of design analysis and resolution. Students will learn to address issues of optimization, environmental surroundings, structure, and site by using various contemporary analytic softwares. This course is required of all second-year architecture graduate students in the M.Arch program. Coordination of the relationship of course content to Graduate Architecture Design 2 will be between the Digital Constructs 2 faculty instructor and the studio coordinator and faculty.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5160.When Offered: Spring term anually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 5200 - Graduate Architecture Design 1: This studio focuses on the relationship between building and landscape in terms of conceptual, pragmatic, ideological, aesthetic, and functional issues. As such, it endeavors to examine critically the disciplinary boundary between building and landscape. It also critically assesses the connections and inherent complexities between an institutional situation, workplace activity, and residential inhabitation in order to explore questions of publicness and privacy. This studio also addresses the tectonic dimensions of construction and structure in architectural design. This course is required of all first-year architecture students in the Master of Architecture program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5100.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 5210 - Graduate Architecture 2: This design studio builds on prior studios emphasizing projects of greater scale and complexity. Typically, the studio designs large-scale housing developments but other projects of similar complexity may be used. The studio requires the analysis and critique of precedent and the writing of an architectural program. This course is required of all first-year architecture students in the Master of Architecture program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5200.When Offered: Spring term anually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 5300 - Materials and Construction SystemsConstruction Systems centers on the development of a technical knowledge of, sensibility to, and intuition for the process by which an architectural design is realized in built form. The interdependence among building materials, acoustic qualities, enclosure systems, interior, finish, and other systems is investigated, with an emphasis on the broader architectural design endeavor. Drawing as a means of understanding forms the basis for a semester-long project to be done in small groups. Case studies will center on concepts and systems that have not yet found their way into mainstream practice. The course approach will involve in-class presentations, project work, field trips and case studies. WebCT will be used to expand the students access to course materials and allow for a measure of distance learning. Sustainability: The notion that design intentions can be nullified through incorrect construction is stressed. The importance of proper detailing, construction, and maintenance to accomplish lasting and efficient enclosures is highlighted. Skills to diagnose and treat incorrect construction are developed.
ARCH 5310 - Environment and Ecological Systems: An exploration of the fundamental principles of human physiology, thermal and luminous comfort, and indoor quality. Emphasis is on bioclimatic and psychrometric climate analysis and its relationship to architectural design, understanding the energy exchange between body in space, the natural meaning of enclosures, and nonstructural materials and systems. The focus is on passive heating, cooling, and daylighting systems and their design. Exercises include vital sign analysis of existing spaces (thermal, air, luminous), forming hypotheses of building performance, using scientific instrumentation, tenant survey techniques, and physical modeling and simulation techniques related to daylighting and shading techniques. This course is required of all architecture graduate students in the M.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: ARCH 5210.When Offered: Spring term anually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 5330 - Economics and Architecture: Economic issues related to the practice of architecture. Topics will include economic cycles and building construction, globalization of architectural practice, case studies of models of practice, setting and negotiation of fees for services, economic relationships of architects and consultants, cost estimation. This course is required of all architecture graduates in the M.Arch. program.When Offered: Spring term anually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 5340 - Materials and Enclosures: In a world of rapid technological change, this course aims to equip future architects with the ability to position, understand, and implement new materials and systems in meaningful ways. The working principles of selected advanced materials and systems are explained and issues of material development, applications, and integration into buildings systems are addressed. Emphasis is also placed on understanding the issues involved when combining and installing new materials or systems into buildings. Students are further introduced to detail development. Sustainability: New materials and systems are explored with the objective of formulating meaningful technological response to critical environmental and societal issues such as resource depletion, environmental degradation, and globalization. This is required of all architecture graduate students in the M.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5300.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 5360 - Building Systems and the Environment: Design analysis and performance characteristics of building environmental systems, emphasizing heating, cooling, ventilation, and lighting systems. In addition, building electrical systems, acoustics, water, waste, and drainage systems are covered in terms of fundamental theory, designs, and calculations. Case studies, field trips, and system design project work are required. This course is required of all architecture graduate students in the M.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5310.When Offered: Spring term anually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 5380 - Professional Practice 1: This course covers topics that are essential to developing an effective professional architectural practice. The course will address professional obligations and ethics, contracts, registration, office organization, and management. The course will emphasize effective communication, negotiating, public speaking, and team development. This course is required of all architecture graduate students in the Master of Architecture program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: ARCH 5380.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 5390 - Professional Practice 2: This course covers topics that are essential to developing an effective professional architectural practice. The course will address professional obligations and ethics, contracts, registration, office organization, and management. The course will emphasize effective communication, negotiating, public speaking, and team development. This course is required of all architecture graduate students in the Master of Architecture program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5380.When Offered: Spring term anually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 6110 - Design Explorations 1: Case studies – investigations into architectural knowledge. Selective architectural works will be deconstructed in order to uncover the knowledge invested in them. Case studies will be subjected to modes of inquiry that will reveal their deep content from conception to realization, including the mental frameworks of the designers, the methods of representation, the technological knowledge employed, the methods of production, and the ingrained cultural values, to develop methods of inquiry that will enable them to pursue similar investigations of any architectural work.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 6120 - Design Explorations 2: Architectural and urban environments are analyzed and explored so as to reveal significant but not obvious content. The precise topics vary but always address important issues. Currently they address the environmental performance of buildings and the role that spatial order/organization of urban environments plays in the construction of social practices, human subjectivities, and technologies of power. Topics alternate every other year.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 6110.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 6130 - Design Explorations 3: Taught with ARCH 6120 with the same topics alternating every year, so that students cumulatively are taught an architectural topic and an urban one over a two-year period.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 6120.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 6210 - Graduate Studio 1: Individual and group projects conducted within the framework of a preselected problem area (or number of problem areas). Individual students pursue specialized elements or aspects of the problem area with emphasis on revealing a deeper knowledge of the parts. Group activity centers on discussions of individual contributions and emphasizes the role of these contributions as they build a greater understanding of the total problem area. For students in the M.Arch. second professional degree program and M.S. in Building Sciences program only.Credit Hours: 2 to 7
ARCH 6220 - Graduate Studio 2: Individual and group projects conducted within the framework of a preselected problem area (or number of problem areas). Individual students pursue specialized elements or aspects of the problem area with emphasis on revealing a deeper knowledge of the parts. Group activity centers on discussions of individual contributions and emphasizes the role of these contributions as they build a greater understanding of the total problem area. For students in the M.Arch. second professional degree program and M.S. in Building Sciences program only.Credit Hours: 2 to 7
ARCH 6310 - Environmental History and Theory: This course has been conceived together with Material Systems and Productions and the Design Research Studio, such that each student will develop a complementary written analysis that critically situates the new material system that the student is developing in design studio within historical, socio-political, and economic flows. The written analysis will directly reference key themes contained within the required readings, lectures, and seminar discussions.  Course taught in New York City.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 6320 - Built Ecologies 1: Advanced graduate level course focusing on the collection, analysis, and application of data for the generation of criteria within the design process. Multiple scales will be investigated, from the material and product scale, to the building/architectural scale, and finally to the urban, regional, and global scales. Course taught in New York City.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites for undergraduates: ARCH 2360 or equivalent or ARCH 4740 or equivalent. Corequisite for M.Arch. 1: ARCH 6610.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 6330 - Built Ecologies 2: In this seminar, students develop and analyze an ecologically sensitive built system related to their thesis topic with particular attention to the architectural, social, and political implications of the work and their inter-relationships. An awareness of the political and economic forces that are instrumental in the development of contemporary built ecologies creates opportunities for innovation in the cultures of making. Course taught in New York City.
ARCH 6340 - Material Systems and Productions: This seminar will investigate emerging functional materials addressing physical adaptability to environmental and climatic fluctuations. Bio-climatic responsiveness via multi-scale intelligence will be examined from innovations on material simulation systems, low energy/low waste manufacturing, raw material reduction, and material consumption reduction within potential design applications. Design exercises will develop building systems or products that reduce material use, weight, volume, or energy consumption with the goal of increasing the environmental performance of the system. Course taught in New York City.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 6350 - Design Research StudioThis initial studio segment will explore variable phases of data collection, processing, and synthesis through explorative visualization methods. These methods will bear the complexity of mapping dynamic forces present in nature juxtaposed to cultural and economical factors. Course taught in New York City.
ARCH 6360 - Interdisciplinary Research Studio: The studio addresses interdisciplinary exchange within research practice, understanding that buildings operate within complex dynamic systems. Buildings and their material systems are composed of interdependent systemic relationships at multiple scales – Built Ecologies – operating as metabolic systems within and upon existent natural and made systems. Design is a method of research, discovering and developing new systems and strategies transferable to many sites. Course taught in New York City.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ARCH 6340 or equivalent, ARCH 6350 or equivalent, ARCH 6310 or equivalent, and ARCH 6320 or equivalent.
ARCH 6380 - Graduate Environmental Parametrics: This course is an intensive workshop that exposes the students at the Center for Architectural Science and Ecology to the computational platforms and parametric techniques that will be used in the analysis and visualization of building and urban scale bioclimactic flows in addition to the whole-building energy matrix. Furthermore, the course uses project-based exercises to expose the broad issues of ecological thinking in built ecologies such as multiple variable trade-off optimization of systems and morphological and tectonic optimization.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: ARCH 6610.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 6380.80 - Environmental Parametrics: The work of this course sets out to describe the meaning, values, and methods of using parametric techniques as both an analytical tool and a generative device in comprehensive performance-based building design. The students learn techniques to set-up feedback between analysis and tactical response in performance-based design while also situating these techniques within the broader discourse and methodology of fostering design ecologies and creating ecologies of design as they relate to the construction of the built environment and contemporary issues of sustainability. In addition to the practical concerns of environmental parametrics, this course will examine closely the theoretical foundation for environmental parametrics. When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 6390 - Energy and Systems Simulation: Energy and Systems Simulation provides students with an introduction to advanced simulation tools and procedures necessary for analyzing the performance of complex environmental building systems. The course utilizes parametric software for the simulation and analysis of multi-objective optimization workflow procedures. Areas of building performance assessment include thermal and daylight optimization.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 6400 - Criticism I: Criticism I introduces students to both historical and contemporary forms of discourse as it relates to the disciplines of architecture, landscape architecture, and urbanism. The course serves as an introduction to critical thinking and writing and provides students with the necessary analytical, verbal, and written skill sets to effectively participate in the discursive aspects of the disciplines of architecture, landscape architecture, and urbanism.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3



ARCH 6410 - Criticism II: Criticism II introduces students to both historical and contemporary forms of discourse as it relates to the disciplines of architecture, landscape architecture, and urbanism. The course serves as an introduction to critical   thinking and writing and provides students with the necessary analytical, verbal, and written skill sets to effectively participate in the discursive aspects of the disciplines of architecture, landscape architecture, and urbanism.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 6510 - Disciplinary Research Methods Seminar: A seminar in research methods. This course will review the major considerations and tasks involved in conducting research in areas appropriate to the architectural sciences. It introduces the essential aspects of designing, supporting, and conducting a research project. Major areas that will be considered include: history and present status of the quantitative and qualitative methods, strengths and weaknesses of each method and approach, location of resources, information and data, sampling or selection of research materials and/or participants, data collection, measurement, data analysis, and research writing and style.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 6520 - Interdisciplinary Ph.D. Seminar: This is a seminar course restricted to students in their second year of doctoral study. It provides a critical forum for the discussion of issues from methods to sources confronting the students on the dissertation. This course will form the core of the interdisciplinary experience of the Doctor of Philosophy in Architectural Sciences. It supports the position that advanced work in architecture frequently builds on knowledge from several disciplines, and as such provides a model for encouraging cross disciplinary work in the Institute. It will involve a combination of senior faculty and visitors and regular presentation of dissertation work in progress.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 6610 - Graduate Architecture Design 3: This is an architectural design studio that addresses state of the art and next generation building systems, structures, and environments. The aim is to provide a design foundation through an understanding of the physics of buildings, the performance analysis and evaluation of the built environment, and to develop building performance design strategies that can have an immediate impact on the professional and the larger built ecology. This course is offered at CASE in New York City and is required of all architecture students in the Master of Architecture program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5210. Corequisites: ARCH 6320, ARCH 6380,ARCH 6810.
ARCH 6620 - Graduate Architecture Design 4: Integrated Design Studio: This studio is a design-based studio that focuses on the integration of structural, technical, detail, zoning, and code-related issues with respect to the design of a moderate to large-scale building of civic importance. Such building types are (but not limited to) libraries, theaters, city halls, judicial buildings, educational buildings, etc. An important focus of the design project will be the relationship of the building to its urban context. An essential part of the design will involve programming of the building as well as responding to numerous of the learning outcomes defined by the NAAB (the accrediting agency for professional architecture programs) for a comprehensive design project. This course is required of all architecture students in the Master of Architecture program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 6610.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 6630 - Graduate Architecture Design 5: Integrated Design Development: This studio is technology-based design studio emphasizing the materialization and making of architectural design projects. The integration of building code requirements for fire protection, life safety, accessibility, building environmental systems, structure, construction, and materiality is central to the effective achievement of design intent. Students become aware of how these issues affect and inform design decisions. They learn to integrate technology, systems, and materials in the comprehensive resolution of building design and gain exposure to construction documents and design documentation. Construction and site visits are an integral part of the studio as is an integrated electronic media seminar on CAD applications. Students must coregister for ARCH 5XXX, Graduate Professional Practice 1, a concurrent 2-credit course that introduces codes, the regulatory process, agreements, contract documents, building design cost control, and administration. This course is required of all architecture students in the Master of Architecture program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 6620.When Offered: Spring term anually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 6680 - History, Theory, Criticism 3: Works of architecture embody knowledge, ideas, and imagination that express formally, spatially, and materially the ways of living and values of the civilizations in which they occur. A select number of modern and contemporary buildings that represent a high degree of sophistication in the way their architects have approached the breadth of design issues both within and external to the programs of those works will be analyzed critically in order to ascertain the significance and relationships of the multiple systems of order inherent to a work of architecture. Reflecting on the knowledge and understandings acquired in all the previous courses in the history, theory, and criticism sequence, this course is a critical inquiry into the principal ideologies and premises of the most substantive architectural practices in the contemporary world. As such, the content of the course must necessarily evolve as the intellectual and cultural parameters of both theory and practice in the contemporary world change. This course is required of all architecture graduate students in the M.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 5110.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 6750 - Final Project Design Research Seminar: This seminar is the first required course of the two-semester, 3rd-year Final Project course sequence in the Master of Architecture program and as such serves as a prerequisite to the spring semester Final Project Design Studio (ARCH 6XXX). The Design Research Seminar provides a forum for readings and discussions as well as design and/or material experimentation as it relates to the respective Graduate Final Project instructors thematic framework. The seminar also covers fundamentals related to standard methods of research and analysis. This course is required of all architecture graduate students in the M.Arch. program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 6680.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 6810 - Research Design Seminar: The principal objective of this seminar is to provide students with the opportunity to learn the fundamentals of research design. Research design includes: 1) identifying and selecting focused research problems/opportunities/ideas; 2) documenting the state of the art in the selected research area; 3) identifying the critical resources and settings to carry out the research; 4) designing the research program including strategies and tactics for carrying out the research. It is hoped that the knowledge gained in the RD Seminar will assist students in the development of their own individual thesis proposals.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: ARCH 6610.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 6830 - Graduate Thesis Seminar: Acoustics: The Graduate Thesis Seminar: Acoustics is designed to provide support to graduate students who are engaged in independent thesis research projects. It is a required course for all graduate students in the Architectural Acoustics programs. This seminar provides a formal opportunity for students and faculty from a range of concentrations to meet together and discuss thesis work in progress.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 6810.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1
ARCH 6840 - Engineering Acoustics: Introductory materials of engineering acoustics for students with basic knowledge in mathematics. Much of the course material is taken from the textbook Acoustics for Engineers by Blauert &amp; Xiang. The course includes mechanic and acoustic oscillations, electromechanic and electroacoustic, magnetic- and electric-field transduction, wave equations in fluids, governing equations for horns and ducts, spherical sound sources and arrays, diffraction and scattering, dissipation, reflection, refraction and absorption, isolation of air- and structure-borne sounds, noise propagation and noise control. Differential equations is recommended.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 6860 - Applied Psychoacoustics: This course covers the fundamentals of psychoacoustics with a focus on Architectural Acoustics. Topics include the functional overview of the auditory system, loudness, pitch, timbre perception, masking, binaural hearing, auditory scene analysis, multi-modal integration, and auditory perception in rooms. Required signal processing methods will be covered as well. The graduate-level course requires an extensive individual project and more advanced analysis.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARCH 6870 - Sonics Research Laboratory 1: The Sonics Research Lab is completely research based. First, students will develop an understanding of the measurement equipment and analysis required in order to quantify qualitative aspects of various sonic environments. In addition, students will examine the ISO standards for measurements in order to develop specific research goals. Students and professors will travel to a performance hall and perform measurements. Students will then analyze the data and interpret the results. Dissemination of results will go toward furthering the practice of architectural acoustics and increasing the understanding of the resultant subjective quality of a room.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: ARCH 4840 or instructor approval.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARCH 6880 - Sonics Research Laboratory 2: The second semester of the Sonics Research Lab focuses on predictability models and virtual acoustics auralization. State-of-the-art software will be used for simulation of room acoustics in order to show the student how such programs assist in refining the design of performance and public spaces.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARCH 6870 or instructor approval.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 6890 - Aural ArchitectureIn this course, design processes in architectural acoustics will be studied from a psychoacoustical perspective. Different concepts to create physical and virtual acoustic spaces will be discussed based on perceptual design goals. Topics include ecological psychoacoustics, sound quality, auditory virtual environments, and auditory computational modeling.
ARCH 6900 - Graduate Thesis Seminar: Readings and discussion of topical materials that are selected to place graduate projects and theses in a comprehensive context.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 6910 - Doctoral Seminar 1: This seminar introduces a disciplinary-specific approach to the development of research problem definition and research methods. The topics considered will be drawn from and situated within the various fields of study that support doctoral study in architectural sciences, as well as from research activities in related fields in engineering, science, and the humanities. Case studies of prototypical architectural science research will evaluate current practice, identifying state of knowledge with the field and the resources and settings necessary to support the research activity. When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 6920 - Doctoral Seminar 2: This seminar builds upon Doctoral Seminar 1 by cultivating a disciplinary-specific approach to the development of research problem definition and research methods. The topics considered will be drawn from and situated within the various fields of study that support doctoral study in architectural sciences, as well as from research activities in related fields in engineering, science, and the humanities. Case studies of prototypical architectural science research will evaluate current practice, identifying state of knowledge with the field and the resources and settings necessary to support the research activity.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARCH 6910 Doctoral Seminar 1.When Offered: Spring and fall terms annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARCH 6940 - Advanced Individual Projects in Architecture and Environmental Design: Individual projects and readings adapted to the needs of individual students at the advanced level.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
ARCH 6948 - Graduate Final Project: This design studio is the second required course of the two-semester, 3rd-year Graduate Final Project course sequence in the graduate Master of Architecture program. The Graduate Final Project Design Studio provides a forum for the design and development of a comprehensive architectural proposal pertinent to the Final Project course sequence. This course is required of all third-year architecture graduate students in the Master of Architecture program.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 5
ARCH 6960 - Special Topics in Architecture and Environmental Design: Experimental courses tried out in one or two terms as the general program requires.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ARCH 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
ARCH 6980 - Masters Project: Active participation in a masters-level project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a masters project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the masters project has been approved by the faculty adviser. Grades will then be listed as S. If recommended by the adviser, the masters project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the library.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ARCH 6630, ARCH 6750.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ARCH 6981 - Methods SeminarSituated within the context of the Masters Thesis (ARCH 6990) directed research studio sequence, this course addresses general methods of design research with an emphasis on studying the ways in which the discipline of architecture engages other fields of knowledge. Through a series of historical and contemporary writings as well as specific precedents in architectural design, students will look at how the discipline of architecture has absorbed external disciplinary, technological, and cultural influences as a means of advancing itself in the world.
ARCH 6990 - Masters Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a masters thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the library.Credit Hours: 5-6
ARCH 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: Variable
ARTS 1010 - Introduction to Music and Sound: This course, which is the prerequisite for further courses in music theory and in computer music, is an introduction to the materials of music. Using a variety of examples from classical, popular, and non-western music, the class will introduce concepts of melody, harmony, rhythm, and musical form. Students will use their laptop computers for aural skills practice, notation, and basic recording exercises. Although no musical experience is required for this course, sight singing is one of the important skills to be developed.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 1020 - Media Studio: Imaging: This course introduces students to digital photography, Web design, and interactive multimedia in making art. Students broaden their understanding of such topics as composition, effective use of images, color theory, typography, and narrative flow. Inquiry and experimentation are encouraged, leading towards the development of the skill and techniques needed to create visual art with electronic media.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 1030 - Digital Filmmaking: This is a hands-on introduction to film making.  Students study a selection of great films; and learn how to make movies using lightweight field production equipment. Throughout the course students produce a variety of short videos in different genres, and develop their critical capacity for analyzing cinema and other forms of motion picutre storytelling. The class ends with a mini film festival where everyone presents their work.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 1040 - Art for Interactive Media: This course combines an introduction to traditional visual arts and digital media and serves as a foundation for work in game design and interactive art. Using studio projects that incorporate physical media, digital imaging and computer code, students develop their formal vocabulary, observational skills, and their understanding of issues in visual and interactive arts.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 1050 - Art History: Paleolithic to Contemporary: A survey of visual arts from Paleolithic Era to today.  Materials is presented in a form accessible to students without previous knowledge of Art History.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 1200 - Basic Drawing: An introductory course in drawing designed to develop seeing ability and means of expressing visual ideas through graphic skills. The course consists of exercises in drawing  from observation and studies from the history of art.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 1440 - Music and Sound I: This is the second of the three-course sequence in music theory and aural skills. The course covers the fundamentals of diatonic harmony and two-part species counterpoint. Aural skills include interval, scale and chord identification, rhythmic and tonal solfege, and dictation. Learning activites include weekly assignments in analysis, composition, performance and improvisation, and self-paced use of software in acquisition of aural skills.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2010 - Intermediate Video: Intermediate Video is a hands-on intensive course that teaches the language, aesthetics, and techniques of video production. Working in groups and individually, students will develop and produce several short video projects. Emphasis will be on the acquisiton of creative and technical production skills in visualizing, scripting, aesthetics, shooting, sound design, and editing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1030 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Bi-annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2020 - Music and Technology I: Music composition taught in the context of modern computerized production methods. Technical topics include basic principles of computer sound generation, digital sound sampling, and the use of small computers for musical control of electronic instruments. Musical topics include a study of important musical works and compositional techniques of the 20th century. Student projects involve hands-on work on a variety of computer instruments and software. This course is a prerequisite for further creative work with Rensselaers computer music facilities.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2040 - Intermediate Digital Imaging: Intermediate Digital Imaging is a hands-on studio course exploring the use of computer technologies in making visual art. A study of contemporary issues in digital media and photography facilitates individual innovation and experimentation. Digital imaging and input/output techniques are employed in terms of giving visual form to ideas and personal expression in private and public settings.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1020 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2060 - 2D Experimental Animation: 2D Experimental Animation is an introduction to animation as an art form. Most of this course will be traditional assignments designed to encourage spontaneous creativity, explore animation concepts, and learn animation terminology. Assignments will build a solid foundation for entrance into Animation 1. This course will also be a historical and theoretical investigation with screenings and readings followed with discussion.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ARTS 1020, ARTS 1200 or ARTS 1040.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2070 - Graphic Storytelling: A studio arts course exploring the fundamental concepts, techniques, styles, and mechanics used in the creation of graphic narrative. Contents to be covered include the fundamentals of sequential art, the purposes and formats of storyboards, basic terminology and concepts used in storyboarding, and the applications of storyboard techniques. Key visual storytelling structures are explored for the following industry applications: comics, animated films, graphic novels, commercials, documentaries, live action feature films, and video gaming.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1020 or ARTS 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Bi-annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2150 - Music and Sound II: A continuation of studies in harmony, analysis, and ear-training. With an introduction to orchestration and 20th century techniques, the course will culminate with an original composition.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1440 (Music and Sound I)When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2210 - Sculpture I: A beginning sculpture course combining hands-on studio work sessions with lectures on the history and theory of sculpture practice. The studio component involves explorations of materials and techniques as tools for the enhancing of visual sensitivity and creative expression.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2220 - Fundamentals of 2-D Design: An introductory course which will present basic concepts about composition, line, pictorial space, light, and color in the visual arts in order to help students develop the means for expressing visual ideas effectively. Weekly homework design projects, using both traditional and electronic media, will be complemented by in-class slide lectures, video tapes, and critiques.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2230 - 3D BootcampA foundational course in concepts and techniques in digital 3D, for animation, games, and digital art. This course focuses on methods and aesthetics in creating digital 3D objects, spaces, and characters, including modeling, texturing, and lighting, as preparation for further courses in the 3D Animation curriculum.
ARTS 2300 - Rensselaer Orchestra: Readings, rehearsals, and performances of works from the standard repertoire for orchestra from the Baroque through the 20th century.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: demonstration of adequate skill in playing an orchestral instrument through audition.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ARTS 2310 - Rensselaer Concert Choir: Readings, rehearsals, and performances of works from the standard choral repertoire, from the Renaissance through the 20th century. Attendance is mandatory and preparation expected.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Audition with instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ARTS 2340 - Introduction to Afro-Cuban Percussion: This course is an introduction to Afro-Cuban folkloric music traditions through lecture demonstration and class participation.  The emphasis is on learning to play Afro-Cuban rhythms and percussion instruments (clave, conga, cowbell, shekere).When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2350 - Chamber Music Ensemble: An instrumental class that will be coached and rehearsed and will perform regularly. The larger ensemble will break up into smaller ensembles such as string quartets, woodwind quintets, trios, etc., depending on the make-up of the group, as well as into more unusual combinations that might be required to prepare 20th century repertoire. For intermediate and advanced players, entrance into the course is by authorization form/permission of instructor.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Audition with instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 2
ARTS 2360 - Roots of Africa Music Ensemble: Roots of Africa Ensemble is a course devoted to learning and performing in African, Afro-Cuban, and New World Percussion.  Students will learn to play current music performed by the ensemble, a percussion ensemble engaged in workshop study and public performance of folkloric music, orginial works by various composers, including compositions by Dr. Eddie Ade Knowles.  Under his direction, students will learn significance of performance within folklore ensembles and how to play instruments from Africa, Cuba, and the New World.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Successful completeion of ARTS 2340, audition, and/or invitation by Professor Knowles.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ARTS 2500 - History of Western Music: The objective of this course is for students to be able to recognize and appreciate the stylistic elements of the major periods and composers from the earliest known music to the present. The influences on music by broad cultural and historical forces will also be explored. Beginning with the Greeks, the course will progress chronologically from the polyphonic religious music of the Middle Ages through the Renaissance, Baroque, Classical, Romantic, and modern periods.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2520 - World Music: From raves to symphony hall, Indian film music to Tibetan chant, monster truck rallies to a mothers lullaby, musical soundscapes surround us through all aspects of our daily lives. This course focuses on the study of music in or as culture. The exploration of music in human life will be comparative, using case studies from diverse world traditions and examining topics such as: ritual, media and technology, ethnicity/identity, music and dance, and musical transmission.When Offered: Bi-annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2540 - The Multimedia Century: This course will survey the history and theory of the diverse artistic practices of the twentieth century in relation to the development of the mass media and new technologies. Topics will include the Bauhaus, Surrealism, Pop Art, and Postmodernism and will span a spectrum of media from the more traditional, such as painting and photography, to electronic and new media, such as video and digital arts. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 2940 - Studies in the Arts: Individual and collaborative projects and assignments at the 2000 level adapted to the needs of individual students. When Offered: Variable.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
ARTS 2960 - Topics in the Arts: Experimental courses offered for one or two semesters. When Offered: Variable.Credit Hours: 2 to 4
ARTS 4010 - Interactive Arts Programming: IAP will examine theoretical concepts of interactive media as well as develop the practical skills needed to implement these concepts using the facilities of the iEAR studios. Topics include high and low level computer programming and electronics. Students will build installations and projects, which control live performance interactions with graphics, video, and sound.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ARTS 2010 or ARTS 2020 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Bi-annuallyCredit Hours: 4
ARTS 4020 - Advanced Digital 3-D Projects: This studio/seminar consists of longer projects with attention to concept, process, and finish. The student will either work individually or as a member on a team and be expected to have a vision or concept they are driven to create. Some possible topics covered may include virtual environments, advanced shader networks, MEL, compositing, non photorealistic rendering, 3-D graphics programming, game engines, or motion capture.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ARTS 4070 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Bi-annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4030 - Multimedia Performance Systems: Multimedia Performance Systems explores the composition and programming of real-time performance systems. The course will examine the basics of MIDI, sound synthesis, digital signal processing, and image/video manipulation. Final projects will consist of a real-time performance system or interactive installation. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  ARTS 2020, graduate status, or permission of instructor.  This course is a good introduction for ARTS 4010, ARTS 4510, and special project seminars in the Electronic Arts.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6030.  Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4040 - Rethinking Documentary: Video Production: This is a production course investigating non-traditional approaches to documentary or non-fiction film/video. Taking a broad look at what defines documentary media, this course will incorporate criticism with production. Students will produce a range of video works questioning conventional documentary styles, using radical and interventionist techniques. Students will study traditional documentary works including ethnographic films, cinema verité, propaganda films, home movies, reality TV, tabloid news, autobiographic and activist videos.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1030 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4060 - 3D Visual Effects: An introduction to the technical techniques and principles of computer animation with a focus on rigging, skinning, character fx, particle simulations, compositioning and rendering. Lectures, discussion, and exposure to contemporary work enable students to develop skills in this rapidly evolving field.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 2230 3D Bootcamp or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4070 - 3D Animation: An intermediate hands-on studio course in 3-D computer animation, acting, dialog, cinematography, and story building.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 2230 3D Bootcamp, ARTS 4060 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4080 - Art, Community, and Technology: Through direct experience in the community, this course explores the complex roles and relationships of art, education, and technology. Students will develop a plan to work with a media arts center, community organization, or school; final teams will produce real-world arts and education projects that ultimately will be realized as significant additions to their professional portfolio.  The projects can include a range from traditional arts practice to creative writing, creative IT models, to community art and activism.When Offered: Spring and fall terms annually.Cross Listed: ARTS 6080. Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4090 - Art and Code and Interactivity: This course is primarily concerned with learning how to build any interactive experience or artwork from concept to completion. It will introduce open-source, cross-platform programming libraries and tools used by artists and programmers to create interactive experiences and artworks for museum installations, festivals, VJ-ing, projection mapping, interactive experiences/artworks, and more. Then, we start to address the questions: Is code an art form? What is interactive art? Is software art?Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1020 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6090; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4100 - Electronic Arts Theory Seminar: This course will be devoted to the investigation of diverse topics of electronic arts history, theory, and practice.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: 2000-level Arts course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4130 - New Media Theory: This course asks what is really new about New Media, and looks at creative practices, theoretical discourses, and social contexts to find answers. The course concentrates on cutting edge cultural expression using information and communication technologies. The objective to equip students with multiple perspectives - aesthetic, communications, historical - with which to analyze, critique, and develop original concepts about the uses of new media in art and culture. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  ARTS 2500, ARTS 2540, or a 2000-level history-theory course in Audio Culture.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6130; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4150 - Media Watch: This seminar is an investigation of the successes and failures of the news media, set within historical and contemporary contexts. The title media watch is intended to evoke a watch-dog approach found in independent media sources and organizations like human rights watch. Assignments involve analyzing how issues are portrayed in the media, and students choose their topics according to their interests. The course can therefore enhance capstone, thesis, or dissertation work.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  2000-level art, media, or cultural history course, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6150.  Student cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4160 - Music and Technology II: This course assumes knowledge and experience in computer music applications and performance. It is directed to undergraduate students as an upper-level seminar guiding your progress through the composition of a significant musical work. The class is divided between a group seminar, focusing on aesthetic, theoretical, and technical issues, and a workshop/lab in performance, computer applications and composition.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 2020 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6160; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4200 - Advanced Drawing: Advanced Drawing is designed to help students who have mastered basic drawing skills to enhance those skills and utilize them to explore visual ideas. Emphasis is placed on individual development of skills and subject matter to help students express themselves visually. Examples and studies are used from master drawings of the past to learn about the history of art and to stimulate ideas for the students own work.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1200, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6200; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4210 - Sculpture II: An advanced studio course in sculpture for students who have taken Sculpture I. Students are encouraged to explore personal areas of interest and are required to develop a familiarity with the history of sculpture as well as mastering fabrication techniques.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 2210.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4220 - Painting: A painting course in opaque media such as oil or acrylic with emphasis on color interaction, composition, and pictorial design. Using sources from observation and the history of painting, students are taught to see and convey effects of color on/in 2-D pictorial space and to develop critical skills in looking at paintings.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6220; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4230 - Inflatable Sculpture: This class studies, creates, and publicly presents inflatable sculptures. The history of inflatables are examined, with special attention paid to how they have been used in political movements that imagine utopian social futures, and how those applications contrast with commercial uses (such as advertising) that have become commonplace in public spaces today. Throughout the class will explore, design, and build inflated structures that may include video and sound elements. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Junior or senior standing or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: ARTS 6230 Inflatable Sculpture.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4240 - Eco Chic: Living Art: Eco Chic: Living Art is an upper level production and theory class about art, biology, and the study of life covering topics such as environmentalism, land art, food art, sustainable practices with art, body art, bio-art. Part lecture, part hands-on workshop, Eco Chic encourages students to redefine and experimentally express their relationships with the varied aspects of everyday living systems and manipulating life.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ARTS 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6240 and may not be taken for credit twice under different numbers.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4260 - Life Drawing and Anatomy for Artists: Life Drawing and Anatomy for Artists is an advanced drawing class that will focus on drawing the human figure.  Students will work from live models to refine their drawing skills; clay models from anatomical texts will be made to develop a working knowledge of anatomy for artists.    Gesture, proportion, and expression of the human figure will be emphasized; general concepts of design and composition will also be presented.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6260; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4390 - Composition SeminarComposition Seminar is an intermediate level course focusing on music composition designed to prepare students for the more extensive creative work involved in the Senior Thesis. The course asks students to model a variety of compositional types of  as a means to exposing them to different systems of musical organization and to help them discover a musical linguistic practice that resonates with their own creative aims.
ARTS 4410 - Deep Listening: Deep Listening is a practice created by the instructor to enhance and expand listening abilities and to encourage creative work. The class will explore different forms of listening including field recording. Each class time will involve experiential exercises, sound pieces, readings, and discussion. Musical training is not prerequisite.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6410; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4420 - Experimental Telepresence: Experiemental Telepresence: investigates the INTERNET as an experimental venue for audio and video performance through improvisation and composition. We will learn protocols for telepresence connections, connect with other institutions using a variety of media in local and co-located performances. The seminar multimedia ensemble Tintinnabulate will be used as a resource of projects.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4430 - Topics in Deep ListeningThis course continues the practice and study of Deep Listening beyond the foundational course Deep Listening. Topics include a wide range of investigations, research, and creativity in Deep Listening.
ARTS 4510 - Experimental Game Design: Experimental Game Design is an upper level studio arts course focusing on the creation of innovative, workable game prototypes using a variety of interactive multimedia. Games are considered as a new genre and are analyzed as cultural artifacts. The aesthetics of game design including character development, level design, game play experience, and delivery systems are covered. Flow, game theory, and game play gestalt are considered. Alternate gaming paradigms and emerging forms are encouraged.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1020 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4520 - Game Development I: This class is a practical primer for anyone interested in a career in the rapidly evolving industry of video gaming. It is an intense, team-based, project-based course in which students will closely follow the actual game development cycle, with each team producing a complete PC game.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 4060 or COGS 2520.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COGS 4520 and CSCI 4520; students cannot obtain credit for more than one course.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4540 - Game Development II: This course follows Game Development I. Students work in interdisciplinary teams to create one large-scale 3D game, working from concept to public release. Projects may include games, educational games, serious games and simulations, and interactive artworks, and will focus on creative design, technical execution, and use of game design principles. The course builds on skills and knowledge in previous courses in the GSAS core, including game design, game mechanics, game programming, art, and narrative.
ARTS 4560 - Hactivism: This course explores the history, methods, and goals of hackers with special attention paid to their role in social movements. It broadly interprets the term hacktivism to include computer hacking, media hacking and reality hacking in the service of social change. Students will gain an understanding of how and why hackers have emerged as a major social force. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Junior or senior standing, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: ARTS 6560 Hactivism.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4620 - Exploring Movement and Sound: The exploration of movement often reveals sensitivities concerning the body, identity, gesture, culture, sensory awareness, perception, space, orientation, kinesthesia, time, relationships to people and objects, as well as cultural notions of embodiment and the senses. This course employs practice-based work, creative experimentation, and traditional forms of research (reading, viewing media, writing, discussions) as the primary methods to illuminate the issues concerning enactive (movement) knowledge. This is a Deep Listening-related course.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: ARTS 6962.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4630 - Writing and Directing for Video: The course introduces students to the art of writing and directing short videos, with an emphasis on generating ideas, and realizing them in a well-developed final project. Major theories and principles are studied through a comparative analysis of scripts and films. Students learn to work with actors, write their own scripts, and direct videos. Two final projects – a script and a video – will integrate all of the elements covered in class. Lecture/Practicum.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ARTS 1030 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Bi-annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4640 - Science Fictions: Science Fictions is an advanced narrative video production and theory course. The class looks at thematic areas of science fiction, utopia and dystopia, paranormal, and speculative fiction. Speculative fiction is a genre that looks at the real world and extends what we know about it, building on the real. The class has two threads: to study narrative structure and create a series of sci-fi videos; to discuss and analyze mainstream and avant-garde science fiction films and themes from early 1900s to the present.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ARTS 1030 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6640; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4840 - Creative Seminar I: This course is for senior EMAC and EART majors and is the core creative forum for the development and presentation of the senior thesis. The course is the first part of a two-semester study provided in two seminar courses.  The focus of the course is to develop a proposal for for a written thesis and a creative project that students will execute in the second seminar and exhibit in an exhibition.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Senior EMAC &amp; EART majors only.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4850 - Creative Seminar II: This course is for senior EMAC and EART majors. The goal of the Creative Seminar II is to develop and formulate ideas from Creative Seminar I into a unique project for the artists/ communicator that will demonstrate his/her independent ideas, research, writing, and design skills.  Students will develop a written thesis, creative project (e.g., art, graphic design, interaction design, music, performance), prepare and present their project in a public exhibition, and design the publicity for the show.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Creative Seminar I, senior EMAC &amp; EART majors only.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4860 - Advanced Digital Imaging: This upper level studio and seminar explores individual visual arts projects contributing to thesis or dissertation development. Topics in creative personal expression in imaging, installation, digital/traditional mixed media and emerging genres will be studied drawing from issues raised in class projects. Advanced studies may include high resolution digital photography, montage, archival printing, gesture drawing, painting, assemblage, processing, stencil art, projection, and evolving genres which lead to an independent final project and web portfolio.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: one related 2000-level arts course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 6860; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 4870 - Creative Data DesignData design offers a way to reveal, analyze, and engage with data, from scientific visualization to information design to artistic sonification. At the same time, the translation from abstract data to image and sound carries risks of manipulation and subjective interpretation. This course introduces contemporary practices in the perceptualizing of data using digital tools for creative exploration and critical analysis. It explores the evolution of visualization and the notion of truth through visual representation.
ARTS 4940 - Studies in the Arts: Individual and collaborative projects and assignments at the 4000 level adapted to the needs of indivudal students. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Variable.Cross Listed: Variable.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
ARTS 4960 - Topics in the Arts: Experimental courses offered for one or two semesters. Credit Hours: 2 to 4
ARTS 4990 - B.S. EARTS Thesis: The purpose of this course is to demonstrate the students capacity for independent work integrating concepts and media from the full range of their studio, history, and theory studies. It is a project-based class, cluminating in a written thesis paper and a public presentation of work determined by the student. This course may be taken multiple times, but is a requirement in the students final two semesters. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: junior and senior EART majors only.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 6030 - Multimedia Performance Systems: Multimedia Performance Systems explores the composition and programming of real-time performance systems. The course will examine the basics of MIDI, sound synthesis, digital signal processing, and image/video manipulation. Final projects will consist of a real-time performance system or interactive installation.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4030.  Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6050 - Rethinking Documentary: Video Production: Rethinking Documentary is a graduate level production course in film and video. Taking a broad look at what defines documentary media, this course incorporates criticism with production to examine key issues in the discipline, such as truth versus fiction, personal responsibility, community involvement, the efficacy of video intervention and the authority of mass media. Students are required to produce a range of video works questioning conventional documentary styles, using radical and interventionist techniques to tell compelling or poetic stories. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Must be a graduate student.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 6080 - Graduate Studio Critique: Development and completion of individual creative projects with a focus on studio production, method, and process. Students are expected to foster an environment in which serious and sophisticated peer critique can take place.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate standing.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3, repeatable with no maximum.
ARTS 6090 - Art and Code and Interactivity: This course is primarily concerned with learning how to build any interactive experience or artwork from concept to completion. It will introduce open-source, cross-platform programming libraries and tools used by artists and programmers to create interactive experiences and artworks for museum installations, festivals, VJ-ing, projection mapping, interactive experiences/artworks, and more. Then, the course starts to address the questions: Is code an art form? What is interactive art? Is software art?When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4090; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6110 - Electronic Arts OverviewThis seminar will deal with the history, theory, and creation of art, popular culture, and mass media from a contemporary perspective. Theoretical and historical texts and a spectrum of electronic arts and media will be investigated. This course  will support the students development and articulation of the aesthetic, cultural, and theoretical underpinnings of their artistic work produced in other studio courses.
ARTS 6120 - Fieldwork as Art: This course is an introduction to fieldwork and ethnographic methods in support of artistic creation. The class will guide students through interviews, participant-observation, and documentation at various field sites to produce diverse creative projects ranging from ethnographic essays to video to installations. Students will be encouraged to work on topical materials of their choice, focused on issues such as technological change, artistic subcultures, or environmentalism. Enrollment is restricted to students with graduate standing or by permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6130 - New Media Theory: This course asks what is really new about New Media, and looks at creative practices, theoretical discourses, and social contexts to find answers. The course concentrates on cutting edge cultural expression using information and communication technologies. The objective is to equip students with multiple perspectives - aesthetic, communications, historical - with which to analyze, critique, and develop original concepts about the uses of new media in art and culture.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4130. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 6150 - Media Watch: This seminar is an investigation of the successes and failures of the news media, set within historical and contemporary contexts.  The title media watch is intended to evoke a watch-dog approach found in independent media sources and organizations like human rights watch. Assignments involve analyzing how issues are portrayed in the media and students choose their topics according to their interests. The course can therefore enhance capstone, thesis, or dissertation work.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4150.  Student cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6160 - Advanced Computer Music Composition and Performance: This course assumes knowledge and experience in computer music applications and performance. It is directed to undergraduate students as an upper-level seminar guiding your progress through the composition of a significant musical work. The class is divided between a group seminar, focusing on aesthetic, theoretical, and technical issues, and a workshop/lab in performance, computer applications and composition.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4160; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6200 - Advanced Drawing: ARTS 6200 focuses on advanced problem solving through a series of challenging observational drawing projects. Emphasis is placed on developing a sophisticated and convincing use of drawing language to approach traditional subject matter. As students gain greater fluency, they also gain a greater critical awareness and understanding of the artistic decision-making process.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4200; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6220 - Painting: A painting course in opaque media such as oil or acrylic with emphasis on color interaction, composition, and pictorial design. Using sources from observation and the history of painting, students are taught to see and convey effects of color on/in 2-D pictorial space and to develop critical skills in looking at paintings.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4220; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6230 - Inflatable Sculpture: This class studies, creates, and publicly presents inflatable sculptures. The history of inflatables are examined, with special attention paid to how they have been used in political movements that imagine utopian social futures, and how those applications contrast with commercial uses (such as advertising) that have become commonplace in public spaces today. Throughout the class will explore, design, and build inflated structures that may include video and sound elements. Graduate students will also be required to write a paper. When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: ARTS 4230 Inflatable Sculpture.Credit Hours: 4



ARTS 6240 - Eco Chic: Living Art: Eco Chic: Living Art is an upper level production and theory class about art, biology, and the study of life covering topics such as environmentalism, land art, food art, sustainable practices with art, body art, bio-art. Part lecture, part hands-on workshop, Eco Chic encourages students to redefine and experimentally express their relationships with the varied aspects of everyday living systems and manipulating life.When Offered: Annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4240 and may not be taken for credit twice under different numbers.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 6250 - Art, Community, and Technology: This course explores the complex roles and relationships of art, education, and technology by giving students direct experience in the community. Students will develop a plan to work with a media arts center, community organization, or school; final teams will produce real-world arts and education projects that can become significant additions to their professional portfolio. The projects can include a range of practices including but not limited to traditional arts, creative writing, creative IT, community art, and activism. Graduate students who take this course will write a mid-term and final paper, plus offer an independent public presentation of their work. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Graduate standing.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: ARTS 4080 Art, Community, and Technology.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 6260 - Life Drawing and Anatomy for Artists: Life Drawing and Anatomy for Artists is an advanced drawing class that will focus on drawing the human figure. Students will work from live models to refine their drawing skills; clay models from anatomical texts will be made to develop a working knowledge of anatomy for artists. Gesture, proportion, and expression of the human figure will be emphasized; general concepts of design and composition will also be presented.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4260; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 6400 - Experimental Game Design: Experimental Game Design is an upper level studio arts course focusing on the creation of innovation workable game prototypes using a variety of interactive media. Games are considered as a new genre and are analyzed as cultural artifacts. The aesthetics of game design including character development, level design, game play experience, and delivery systems are covered. Flow, game theory, and game play gestalt are considered. Alternate gaming paradigms and emerging forms are encouraged. When Offered: Spring and fall terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6410 - Deep Listening: Deep Listening is a practice created by the instructor to enhance and expand listening abilities and to encourage creative work. The class will explore different forms of listening including field recording. Each class time will involve experiential exercises, sound pieces, readings, and discussion. Musical training is not prerequisite.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4410; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6420 - Experimental Telepresence: Research, plan, create, and execute portfolio projects involoving networked improvisation, composition, and performance via Internet and Internet 2. Study and use telematic technology such as Lola, JackTrip, SKYPE, mobile, and other devices in performances with others in distant locations. Participate in multimedia improvisation ensemble (Tintinnabulate) as a resource for implementing projects.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6430 - Topics in Deep ListeningThis course continues the practice and study of Deep Listening beyond the foundational course Deep Listening. Topics include a wide range of investigations, research, and creativity in Deep Listening.
ARTS 6560 - Hactivism: This course explores the history, methods, and goals of hackers with special attention paid to their role in social movements. It broadly interprets the term hacktivism to include computer hacking, media hacking, and reality hacking in the service of social change. Students will gain an understanding of how and why hackers have emerged as a major social force. Graduate students will produce an ethnographic record and analysis of a publicly recognized hacking event or figure. When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: ARTS 4560 Hactivism.Credit Hours: 4
ARTS 6570 - Research Methods: This seminar is an investigation of creative, theoretical, and historical research methods in the interdisciplinary arts. Students will be introduced to arts practice-based research discourses and will gain competence in writing and research techniques, conventions, and methods. This course is a requirement for all Arts Department doctoral students.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6640 - Science Fictions: Science Fictions is an advanced narrative video production and theory course. The class looks at thematic areas of science fiction, utopia and dystopia, paranormal, and speculative fiction. Speculative fiction is a genre that looks at the real world and extends what we know about it, building on the real. The class has two threads: to study narrative structure and create a series of sci-fi videos; to discuss and analyze mainstream and avant-garde science fictions film and themes from early 1900s to the present.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4640; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6860 - Advanced Digital Imaging: This upper level studio and seminar explores individual visual arts projects contributing to thesis or dissertation development. Topics in creative personal expression in imaging, installation, digital/traditional mixed media and emerging genres will be studied drawing from issues raised in class projects. Advanced studies may include high resolution digital photography, montage, archival printing, gesture drawing, painting, assemblage, processing, stencil art, projection, and evolving genres which lead to an independent final project and web portfolio. When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4860; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6900 - Arts Graduate Colloquium: This course provides a forum for interdisciplinary graduate discourse and community at Rensselaer. Students will curate a series of presentations by guest speakers, faculty, and graduate students.Related readings and writing assignments will be based on colloquium presentations. Arts Ph.D students are required to take the colloquium each semester until the semester they take their qualifying examination and enroll for dissertation credits.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate standing in any graduate degree program, not just Arts.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6940 - Studies in Electronic Arts: Individual and collaborative projects and assignments adapted to the needs of individual students at the graduate level.When Offered: Variable.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
ARTS 6960 - Topics in Electronic Arts: Experimental courses offered for one to two semesters.Credit Hours: 3
ARTS 6990 - Masters Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a masters thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has been presented, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the library.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Must have passed two Qualifying Reviews.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ARTS 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of S or U are assigned by the advisor each term to reflect the students research progress for the given semester, until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Must have passed Qualifying Exam or must be in a semester when taking Qualifying Exam. When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 12
ASTR 1510 - Quasars and Cosmology: An introduction to the origin and large-scale structure of the Universe. Topics to be covered include: the contents and geometry of the Universe, the Big Bang model, particle physics and the formation of the elements, galaxy formation, dark matter, black holes, and active galactic nuclei. If ASTR 1510 is taken as a 1-credit course, it will be graded satisfactory/unsatisfactory and it cannot be counted towards the Institutes baccalaureate requirement of 24 credits in the sciences. If ASTR 1510 is taken as a 2-credit course, it will be graded in the conventional manner. If ASTR 1510 and ASTR 1530 are both taken as graded 2-credit courses, they may be counted together as one 4-credit elective for nonscience majors.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1 or 2
ASTR 1530 - Tour of the Solar System: A survey of the solar system based on recent results from ground-based observations and space probes. Topics to be covered include: the sun, moon, Venus, Mars, the giant planets, comets, and the search for life in the solar system. If ASTR 1530 is taken as a 1-credit course, it will be graded satisfactory/unsatisfactory, and it cannot be counted towards the Institutes baccalaureate requirement of 24 credits in the sciences. If ASTR 1530 is taken as a 2-credit course, it will be graded in the conventional manner. If ASTR 1510 and ASTR 1530 are both taken as graded 2-credit courses, they may be counted together as one 4-credit elective for nonscience majors.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1 or 2
ASTR 1960 - Topics in Astronomy and Astrophysics: Credit Hours: 1
ASTR 2050 - Introductory Astronomy and Astrophysics: Astronomy for students with a background of college mathematics and physics. Topics include: astrophysical concepts, solar system basics, stellar astronomy and the interstellar medium, the Milky Way system, galaxies, quasars, and cosmology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: PHYS 1200.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ASTR 2120 - Earth and Sky: An introduction to astronomy from an observational perspective. Students will learn the basics of observing the night-time sky, both with the unaided eye and through telescopic observation. Observations of Earth from orbiting satellites will also be discussed. The course is suitable for nonphysics and nonscience majors as well as those committed to specialization in Astronomy. Includes evening laboratory sessions.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ASTR 2940 - Special Projects in Astronomy: Study and research in various fields of astronomy to demonstrate interest in and ability for independent work.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
ASTR 4120 - Observational Astronomy: An introduction to astronomical observing techniques and instrumentation. Optical telescope design. Observatory site selection. Telescopes above the atmosphere. Imaging techniques: photography, charge-coupled devices. Optical photometry, spectroscopy, and polarimetry, and their applications. Infrared techniques and applications. Radio astronomy. Includes evening laboratory sessions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ASTR 2050 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ASTR 4220 - Astrophysics: A survey course in modern astrophysics with an emphasis on stellar astrophysics and interstellar matter; topics include star formation, the structure and observable properties of normal and degenerate stars; and the composition, dynamics, and stability of the interstellar medium.Prerequisites/Corequisites: PHYS 2220 and PHYS 4420 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ASTR 4240 - Gravitation and Cosmology: Introduction to the physics of gravitation and spacetime. Special relativity, tensor calculus, and relativistic electrodynamics. General relativity with selected applications of Einsteins field equations (gravitational time dilation; gravitational lensing; frame dragging; gravitational radiation). The physics of nonrotating and rotating black holes. Relativistic models for the large-scale structure of the Universe. Observational constraints on the cosmological parameters. Big Bang nucleosynthesis, the Cosmic Background Radiation. A culminating experience project is required. (Meets with PHYS 4240.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 4330 and MATH 4600.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with PHYS 4240. Students cannot receive credit for both ASTR 4240 and PHYS 4240.Credit Hours: 4
ASTR 4510 - Origin of Life: A Cosmic Perspective: To understand the origin of life is a fundamental goal of science. Discussions include evidence for important prebiotic molecules in the clouds from which new planetary systems are born, and compare cosmic and terrestrial sources of such molecules on the primitive Earth. The course is multidisciplinary, covering topics in physics, astronomy, chemistry, earth sciences, and biology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ASTR 2050 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ASTR 4900 - Astrophysics Undergraduate Seminar: Discussion of topics in the current astrophysical literature. Each student is required to give one oral presentation based on a paper or group of papers.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: junior standing or higher or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ASTR 4940 - Special Projects in Astronomy: Study and research in various fields of astronomy to demonstrate interest in and ability for independent work.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
ASTR 4960 - Topics in Astronomy and Astrophysics: Credit Hours: 4
ASTR 6250 - Interstellar Medium: Thermal structure and dynamics of the interstellar medium. Topics include diffuse nebulae, composition of interstellar dust and relation to extinction and polarization, molecules and interstellar chemistry, physics of star-forming regions. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ASTR 4220.When Offered: Consult department about when offered.Credit Hours: 3
ASTR 6900 - Astrophysics Seminar: Discussion of topics in the current astrophysical literature. Each student is required to give an oral presentation based on a paper or group of papers. For graduate students only.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ASTR 6940 - Readings in Astronomy and Astrophysics: Credit Hours: 3
ASTR 6960 - Special Topics in Astronomy and Astrophysics: Supervised reading and study in various fields of astrophysics.Credit Hours: 3
ASTR 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
BCBP 2900 - Research in Biochemistry/Biophysics: Hands-on research in a faculty members research laboratory.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3 to 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 9 to 12 contact hours
BCBP 2930 - Out-of-Classroom Experience in Biochemistry/Biophysics: Credit to be given for an out-of-classroom experience related to biochemistry and/or biophysics (BCBP) having intellectual content relevant to the students educational or career goals, subject to approval of a written proposal and a final written report. The adviser (for BCBP majors) or, with permission, any BCBP faculty member may serve as evaluator. For each out-of-classroom experience a student may register only once.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BCBP 2940 - Readings in Biochemistry/Biophysics: Independent study of selected readings in the fields of biochemistry and biophysics, supervised by a faculty member.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BCBP 4310 - Genetic Engineering: In this course, students will explore the molecular methods and applications of recombinant DNA technology and the issues regarding their use through case studies on the effect of genetic engineering in medicine, agriculture, biology, forensics, and various other areas of technology. The course has three major components: 1) techniques used in the generation of recombinant molecules, 2) application of recombinant technology to diagnostics and therapeutics and 3) genetically modified organisms. May be used to fulfill the Culminating Experience requirement in Biology. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and BCBP 6310.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites or corequisites: BCBP 4760 and BIOL 4620, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 4550 - Molecular Modeling: This course covers the theory and practice of the structural modeling of proteins and other biomolecules using informatics-driven and energy-based approaches. Topics include template-based comparative modeling, secondary structure prediction, tertiary structure prediction, protein classification, sidechain rotamers, docking, protein design, energy minimization, electrostatics, molecular dynamics, and molecular surfaces. Molecular modeling software will be provided. Laptop computers are required. BIOL 4550, BIOL 6420, BCBP 4550, and BCBP 6420 meet jointly; only one of these courses can be taken for credit.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020, BIOL 4620, BIOL 4760.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 4550/6420, BCBP 4550/6420.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 4640 - Proteomics: Characterization of patterns and changes in patterns of protein expression with development, aging, and disease. Protein separation and quantification strategies; mass spectrometry and analysis of spectra; protein profiling, biomarkers, post-translational modifications; current applications; emerging technologies and applications. Individual presentations on relevant topics will be expected. (Students cannot obtain credit for this course and BIOL 4640, BCBP 6640 or BIOL 6640.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BCBP 4760 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 4710 - Biochemistry Laboratory: Major principles of biochemistry are illustrated as students purify and analyze specific proteins. Experience is obtained with various techniques including protein extraction from bacteria and tissues, chromatography, ultracentrifugation, spectrophotometric analysis, and electrophoresis. The course includes extensive hands-on laboratory work, as well as the writing of in-depth reports. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and BIOL 4710.) This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 1010, BIOL 2120.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 4760 - Molecular Biochemistry I: Part I of a two-semester sequence focusing on the chemistry, structure, and function of biological molecules, macromolecules, and systems. Topics covered include protein and nucleic acid structure, enzymology, mechanisms of catalysis, regulation, lipids and membranes, carbohydrates, bioenergetics, and carbohydrate metabolism. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and either BIOL 4760 or CHEM 4760.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 2250 and BIOL 1010 or BIOL 2120 or equivalents.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as BIOL 4760 and CHEM 4760.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 4770 - Molecular Biochemistry II: The second semester of the molecular biochemistry sequence. Topics include lipids and lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism and the coenzymes involved in this metabolism, nucleic acid synthesis and chemistry, protein synthesis and degradation, integration of metabolism, photobiology, and photosynthesis. This course is taught in studio mode. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and either BIOL 4770 or CHEM 4770.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BCBP 4760 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as BIOL 4770 and CHEM 4770.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 4780 - Protein Folding: The biophysical mechanism of protein folding and the role of misfolding in human diseases is explored. The course will introduce principles of protein structure, protein folding in the cell, and thermodynamic and kinetic methods for studying protein folding in vitro. The course will also involve a literature-based discussion of human diseases related to protein folding defects, including Alzheimer’s and other amyloid diseases, cystic fibrosis, and Prion-related syndromes.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BCBP 4760 or equivalent. (Students may not receive credit for both this course and BCBP 6780, CHEM 4780, or CHEM 6780.)When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 4800 - Methods in Biophysics: Biophysics addresses the physical principles of biological function, which requires the application of physical methods. The focus of this course is on methods used to study the interactions and dynamics of biomolecules in vitro, primarily proteins and nucleic acids. Both the theoretical and methodological aspects of molecular biophysical methods will be covered. This course is designed as an interdisciplinary introduction to the field and is open to students in Biology, Chemistry, Physics, or Engineering.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Presrequisite: BCBP 4760 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: With BCBP 6800. Students cannot receive credit for both BCBP 4800 and BCBP 6800.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 4870 - Protein Structure Determination: X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) are used to determine 3-D structures of biological macromolecules at atomic resolution. The course will cover crystallographic and NMR methods, their theory and practice, along with thermodynamics of structure formation and molecular dynamics. Students will prepare a poster presentation on a protein of their choice. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and BCBP 6870.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BCBP 4760, MATH 1020, and PHYS 1200 or equivalents.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 4990 - Senior Research Thesis: Independent laboratory research, on or off campus, supervised by a faculty member, culminating in a written thesis; or literature research culminating in the writing of a review article. The thesis research must also be presented in the form of a poster presentation or a talk. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 6170 - Advanced Topics in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance: Advanced graduate course covering fundamental aspects of NMR common for application in a broad range of fields. Classical and quantum-mechanical descriptions are utilized to explore information content of NMR pulse sequences. The latter approach includes density matrix theory and proceeds with the product-operator formalism.  Practical aspects and data analysis are also described. Subsequent focus is on liquid-state NMR of biological macromolecules, including resonance assignment and determination of molecular structure and dynamics. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CHEM 6170.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 4410 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 6310 - Genetic Engineering: In this course, students will explore the molecular methods and applications of recombinant DNA technology and the issues regarding their use through case studies on the effect of genetic engineering on medicine, agriculture, biology, forensics, and various other areas of technology. The course has three major components: 1) techniques used in the generation of recombinant molecules, 2) application of recombinant technology to diagnostics and therapeutics and 3) genetically modified organisms. May be used to fulfill the Culminating Experience requirement in Biology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Undergraduate course in molecular biology and biochemistry or permission of instructor. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and BCBP 4310.)When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 6420 - Molecular Modeling: This course covers the theory and practice of the structural modeling of proteins and other biomolecules using informatics-driven and energy-based approaches. Topics include template-based comparative modeling, secondary structure prediction, tertiary structure prediction, protein classification, sidechain rotamers, docking, protein design, energy minimization, electrostatics, molecular dynamics, and molecular surfaces. Molecular modeling software will be provided. Laptop computers are required. BIOL 4550, BIOL 6420, BCBP 4550, and BCBP 6420 meet jointly; only one of these courses can be taken for credit.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020, BIOL 4620, BIOL 4760.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 4550/6420, BCBP 4550.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 6550 - Etihical Issues in Biotechnology: This course reviews the principles of ethical behavior and responsible conduct of research and discusses specific areas of biotechnology research, medical research and societal issues in the context of these principles. Representative topics include genetic engineering, stem cell research, assisted reproduction, human subjects, animal research and nanotechnology. Active student participation is expected.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Undergraduate registration only with permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: BMED 6700 and BIOL 6550. Students may not receive credit for both BCBP 6550 BIOL 6550 or BMED 6700.Credit Hours: 3
BCBP 6640 - Proteomics: Characterization of patterns and changes in patterns of protein expression with development, aging, and disease. Protein separation and quantification strategies; mass spectrometry and analysis of spectra; protein profiling, biomarkers, post-translational modifications; current applications; emerging technologies and applications. Individual presentations on relevant topics will be expected. (Students cannot obtain credit for this course and BCBP 4640, BIOL 4640, or BIOL 6640.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BCBP 4760 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BCBP 6780 - Protein Folding: The biophysical mechanism of protein folding and the role of misfolding in human diseases is explored. The course will introduce principles of protein structure, protein folding in the cell, and thermodynamic and kinetic methods for studying protein folding in vitro. The course will also involve a literature-based discussion of human diseases related to protein folding defects, including Alzheimers and other amyloid diseases, cystic fibrosis, and Prion-related syndromes. (Students may not receive credit for both this course and BCBP 4780, CHEM 4780, or CHEM 6780.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BCBP 4760 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 6800 - Methods in Biophysics: Biophysics addresses the physical principles of biological function, which requires the application of physical methods. The focus of this course is on methods used to study the interactions and dynamics of biomolecules in vitro, primarily proteins and nucleic acids. It will cover both the theoretical and methodological aspects of molecular biophysical methods. Thios course is designed as an interdisciplinary introduction to the field and is open to students in Biology, Chemistry, Physics, or Engineering.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BCBP 4760 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall semester annually.Cross Listed: With BCBP 4800. Students cannot receive credit for both BCBP 4800 and BCBP 6800.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 6870 - Protein Structure Determination: X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) are used to determine 3-D structures of biological macromolecules at atomic resolution. The course will cover crystallographic and NMR methods, their theory and practice, along with thermodynamics of structure formation and molecular dynamics. Students will prepare an oral presentation on a protein of their choice. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and BCBP 4870.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BCBP 4760, MATH 1020, and PHYS 1200 or equivalents.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
BCBP 6910 - Research Rotation: The student will perform hands on research in the lab of a BCBP faculty to learn basic research methods and techniques, accomplish a small research project and determine whether the lab is a good ﬁt for thesis research.
BCBP 6940 - Readings in Biochemistry/Biophysics: Independent study of selected readings in the fields of biochemistry and biophysics, supervised by a faculty member.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BCBP 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
BCBP 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
BCBP 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
BIOL 1010 - Introduction to Biology: Introduction to biological systems. Discussion of problems associated with biological organization, scaling, and hierarchy. Major topics covered include evolution, genetics and medicine, and ecology. The course considers the biological components of various environmental, social and individual problems. Course is taught using both traditional and research-based pedagogical methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: BIOL 1015 - Introduction to Biology Laboratory is a corequisite.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
BIOL 1015 - Introduction to Biology Laboratory: The goal of this laboratory course is to learn about biology through hands-on, project-based lab activities that engage students in actual biology experiments and procedures - learning biology by actually doing biology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: BIOL 1010 Introduction to Biology.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
BIOL 2120 - Introduction to Cell and Molecular Biology: Structural and functional relationships of cells are discussed with regard to similarities among all living organisms. Introduction to cellular biochemistry, metabolism and energy flow, cellular and Mendelian genetics, and the chemical basis of heredity. The laboratory exercises illustrate current concepts in cellular and molecular biology.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
BIOL 2160 - Introduction to Geobiology: This course focuses on the co-evolution of life with Earths systems and targets students in Earth science, biology, chemistry, and physics. Topics include the emergence and early evolution of life on Earth, the environmental limits of life, microbial and metabolic evolution; the role of life in moderating global elemental cycles; earliest records of life; evolution of photosynthesis and the Great Oxidation Event; fossilization and evolution of complex life; mass radiations, mass extinctions and global change.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ERTH 1100 recommended, not required.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: ERTH 2160.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 2500 - Genetics and Evolution: Mechanisms of inheritance in eukaryotes and prokaryotes; genetic mapping, gene expression, cloning and sequencing; quantitative and population genetics, and synthetic theory of evolution.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 2120.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 2900 - Research in Biology: Independent study program for the purpose of developing research skills under the guidance of a faculty member. This course may be repeated and it cannot count as a biology elective.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 3 to 12 contact hours
BIOL 2930 - Out-of-Classroom Experience in Biology: Credit to be given for an out-of-classroom experience related to biology having intellectual content relevant to the students educational or career goals, subject to approval of a written proposal and a final report. The adviser (for biology majors) or, with permission, any Biology faculty member may serve as evaluator. For each out-of-classroom experience, a student may register only once for 1 to 4 credit hours. This course cannot be used as a biology elective.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BIOL 4100 - From Neuron to Behavior: A detailed survey of important topics in the neurosciences. Some of the topics to be covered in this class are: basic mechanisms of neural signaling (neurophysiology, synaptic transmission, and molecular signaling); understanding of sensation/movement and in particular how it relates to neuroanatomy; neurodevelopment and how the mature brain can change (plasticity); complex brainfunctions and neurological disease. Taught together with BIOL 6100.  Although there is extra work associated with the 6100 course, both courses may not be taken for credit.Prerequisites/Corequisites: BIOL 1010, BIOL 2120 or permission of the instructor. When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 6100.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4110 - Investigative Medicine I: Students will be exposed to real time investigative biomedical research projects that are currently in development, taught the principles of research project development and exposed to clinical experiences at a level typically found in college graduates/post graduates who are entering medical school.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Intended only for 3rd Year RPI students who are in the combined B.S./M.D. Physician Scientist Program with Albany Medical College.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
BIOL 4120 - Investigative Medicine II: Students will be exposed to several clinical experiences at a level typically found in college graduates/post graduates who are entering medical school.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 4110, Investigative Medicine I. Intended only for 3rd Year RPI students who are in the combined B.S./M.D. Physician Scientist Program with Albany Medical College. When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1
BIOL 4200 - Biostatistics: An introduction to the concepts and techniques of modern statistics. Computer-based, in-class sessions will emphasize hands-on application of statistical techniques using data and examples drawn from the biological and medical sciences. Pre-class, online exercises will prepare students for in-depth classroom explorations. Topics covered will include sampling, regression, analysis of variance, and factor analysis, MANOVA, maximum liklihood methods, discriminant analysis, time series analysis, and forecasting. The final project requires analysis of a major research-related data set and write-up of results in the format of a scientific paper.Prerequisites/Corequisites: BIOL 1010, MATH 1010, or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4250 - Developmental Biology: Model systems provide the experimental basis for understanding the conserved principles of developmental biology. This class will cover fundamental topics including axis specification, pattern formation, cell fate and determination, cell differentiation, senescence, and apoptosis.  Emphasis will be placed on integrating gene function and cell behavior with development. Model systems include vertebrates (e.g. frog and chick) and genetically tractable invertebrates (e.g. fruitflies and roundworms).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BIOL 2120, BIOL 2500.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4260 - Advanced Cell Biology:  This course is designed to enable students to understand how an organism functions at the cellular and molecular level, and further, how this functioning is regulated so that cells can adapt to changes in their environment. Students will learn the fundamental components of the cell (from protein to organelle), their characteristics, and how these components function in both normal and diseased cells. Students will also learn biochemical, structural, and mechanical aspects of cell functioning and regulation in normal and diseased cells. In addition, students will learn to critically read current scientific literature. By reading current literature, students will gain knowledge of the practice and presentation of science, as well as learn about new techniques and findings. This course can be used to fulfill the Culminating Experience in Biology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 2120 and one of the following: BIOL 4620, BIOL 4760.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 6260. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and BIOL 6260.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4270 - Human Physiology: Fundamental physiological processes and their mechanism of action in human and higher mammalian organisms. Emphasis on the control and interaction of physiological systems. Introduction to the muscle, nervous, circulatory, renal, respiratory, digestive, reproductive, and hormonal systems. Limited to biology, biochemistry and biophysics, bioinformatics and molecular biology majors, and biology accelerated medical students. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BIOL 2120 or BIOL 4620, CHEM 2250, PHYS 1100. Not recommended for freshmen and sophomores.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4310 - Microbiology: Microbiology is the study of microscopic organisms, including members of all the kingdoms of life. The course has two objectives: 1) Provide an overview of the diversity, genetics, and physiology of microorganisms. 2) Review current topics of investigation in Microbiology in detail. Microbes will be studied from a cellular and molecular perspective. This includes structure, nutrition, growth, control, classification, and genetics. This course will provide BIOLOGY STUDENTS the necessary background in bacterial genetics, pathogenic microbiology, prokaryotic physiology, eukaryotic microbiology, molecular biology, and microbial ecology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Biology 2120 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 6310. Students may not obtain credit for both this course and BIOL 6310.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4320 - Microbiology Lab: Microbiology Laboratory will provide hands-on experience for broad training in bacteriology and mycology with emphasis on: microscopy, bacterial growth, and biochemical assays. An investigative component will involve characterization of an unknown bacterium using the analytical tools learned. In addition to laboratory experience and good technique, the course will emphasize written communication with reports in the format of scientific papers. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BIOL 4310/6310 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall semester annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4350 - Virology: This course will provide an exploration of the essential aspects of virology. Introductory examination of viral structure, entry, and replication for each of the major classes of viruses serve as a foundation. Case studies will examine virus host interactions and strategies for prevention and intervention of viral infection. Additional topics include: emerging viruses, viral detection, viral extinction, beneficial use of viruses, modified viruses as research tools.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 4620 and BIOL 4310 or permission of istructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 6350. A student cannot get credit for both BIOL 4350 and BIOL 6350.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4360 - Geomicrobiology: This course examines relationships between microorganisms and Earth processes. Topics include the origins of life on earth, surface metabolism theory, biological and biochemical benchmarks. Earth is considered as a microbial habitat with an emphasis on the lithosphere and hydrosphere, including soils, seawater, lakes, rivers, and groundwater. Geomicrobial processes are discussed with an emphasis on microbes as catalysts of geochemical processes including conversion of inorganics and metals, and mineralization of organics. Molecular and non-molecular methods for detection, isolation, and identification of geo-microbially active organisms are introduced.Prerequisites/Corequisites: BIOL 1010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 6360 and BIOL 4360. Cross listed as ENVE 4360/6360. Students cannot obtain credit for both ENVE 4360/6360 and BIOL 4360/6360.Credit Hours: 3
BIOL 4510 - Origins of Life: To understand the origin of life is a fundamental goal of science. Evidence for important prebiotic molecules in the clouds from which new planetary systems are born is discussed, and a comparison is made of cosmic and terrestrial sources of such molecules on the primitive Earth. The course is multidisciplinary, covering topics in physics, astronomy, chemistry, earth sciences, and biology. Students may not obtain credit for more than one of ASTR 4510, ERTH 4510, or BIOL 4510.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ASTR 2050 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: ASTR 4510/ERTH 4510.Credit Hours: 3
BIOL 4540 - Sequence Analysis:  This course covers the theory and practice of biological sequence analysis, including algorithms for pairwise sequence alignment, multiple sequence alignment, phylogenetic analysis, and database searching. Concepts covered include homology, sequence similarity, parsimony, mechanisms and metrics of molecular evolution, biological data bases, database search algorithms (BLAST), and statistical significance. Selected topics include hidden Markov models, bootstrap analysis and gene finding. Modern sequence analysis software will be provided. Laptop computers and programming knowledge are required. Meets jointly with BIOL 6410.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 1020, BIOL 4620, CSCI 1200, or equilavent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 6410. Both cannot be taken for credit.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4550 - Molecular Modeling: This course covers the theory and practice of the structural modeling of proteins and other biomolecules using informatics-driven and energy-based approaches. Topics include template-based comparative modeling, secondary structure prediction, tertiary structure prediction, protein classification, sidechain rotamers, docking, protein design, energy minimization, electrostatics, molecular dynamics, and molecular surfaces. Molecular modeling software will be provided. Laptop computers are required. BIOL 4550, BIOL 6420, BCBP 4550, and BCBP 6420 meet jointly; only one of these courses can be taken for credit.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020, BIOL 4620, BIOL 4760.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 6420, BCBP 4550/6420.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4620 - Molecular Biology: Nucleotide biosynthesis; structure, replication, transcription, and translation of nucleic acids; reassociation of nucleic acids; molecular cloning, sequencing, and endonuclease mapping of DNA; control of gene expression in bacteria and higher organisms. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BIOL 2120 and BIOL 2500 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4630 - Molecular Biology II
BIOL 4640 - Proteomics: Characterization of patterns and changes in patterns of protein expression with development, aging, and disease. Protein separation and quantification strategies; mass spectrometry and analysis of spectra; protein profiling, biomarkers, post-translational modifications; current applications; emerging technologies and applications. Individual presentations on relevant topics will be expected.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BCBP 4760 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BCBP 4640/6640 and BIOL 6640. Students cannot obtain credit for this course and BCBP 4640, BCBP 6640 or BIOL 6640.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4710 - Biochemistry Laboratory: Major principles of biochemistry are illustrated, as students purify and analyze specific proteins. Experience is obtained with various techniques including protein extraction from bacteria and tissues, chromatography, ultracentrifugation, spectrophotometric analysis, and electrophoresis. The course includes extensive hands-on laboratory work, as well as the writing of in-depth reports. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and BCBP 4710.) This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 1010, BIOL 2120.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with BCBP 4710.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4720 - Molecular Biology Laboratory: The techniques of gel electrophoresis, restriction enzyme mapping, PCR, and use of a molecular biology software program are applied to the study of bacterial plasmids and mammalian genes. The course includes extensive hands-on laboratory work, as well as the writing of in-depth reports. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 2120, BIOL 4620.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4740 - Cell and Developmental Biology Laboratory: Students will learn a variety of modern cell and developmental biology techniques such as cell culture, genetic analysis, immunocytochemistry, fluorescence microscopy, and live cell imaging. Using these techniques, students will investigate the function of genetically manipulated proteins in cells and developing embryos. In the last third of the semester, students will develop independent experimental research plans to address questions of interest to the student. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 2120, BIOL 2500.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4760 - Molecular Biochemistry I: Part I of a two-semester sequence focusing on the chemistry, structure, and function of biological molecules, macromolecules, and systems. Topics covered include protein and nucleic acid structure, enzymology, mechanisms of catalysis, regulation, lipids and membranes, carbohydrates, bioenergetics, and carbohydrate metabolism.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 2250 or CHEM 2210 and BIOL 1010 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as BCBP 4760 and CHEM 4760. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and either BCBP 4760 or CHEM 4760.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4770 - Molecular Biochemistry II: The second semester of the molecular biochemistry sequence. Topics include lipids and lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism and the coenzymes involved in this metabolism, nucleic acid synthesis and chemistry, protein synthesis and degradation, integration of metabolism, photobiology, and photosynthesis. This course is taught in studio mode. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and either BCBP 4770 or CHEM 4770.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 4760 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4850 - Principles of Ecology: A study of the fundamental principles of the ecology of plants and animals. Interrelationships between organisms and their environments are discussed as well as material and energy balances in the ecosystem. Emphasis on the biology of populations (producers, consumers, and decomposers).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 1010 or BIOL 2120.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4860 - Evolution: Phylogeny and the patterns of evolution in the fossil record, geography of evolution, biodiversity, origin of genetic variation, genetic drift, natural selection and adaptation, genetic theory of natural selection, evolution of phenotypic traits, conflict and cooperation, speciation, fitness, coevolution, genomic evolution, evolution and development, macroevolution, evolutionary science and society. May be used to fulfill the Culminating Experience requirement in Biology. Lectures, student presentations, and peer learning.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 2500.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4870 - Lake George Limnology and Underwater Ecology (BLUE): The goal of this interdisciplinary course is to teach students about limnology and freshwater ecology using Lake George as a model system. Chemical, physical, and biological characteristics that are critical for understanding the functioning of an aquatic ecosystem will be examined, as will the utilization of traditional and modern instrumentation and sampling and the analysis of big environmental data sets.Prerequisites/Corequisites: BIOL 4850 Principles of Ecology or permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4900 - Team Research: Independent research by teams under the supervision of a faculty member, including literature search, brief proposal of project design, conduct of project to completion, and writing of a formal report in the form of a scientific paper and presentation of a seminar or poster on the project. May be used to fulfill the Culminating Experience in Biology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Restricted to Biology majors who have completed BIOL 1010, BIOL 2120, and BIOL 2500, or equivalents and who have permission of the instructor to register.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4961 - Human Population: This interdisciplinary course examines the human ecology of the global human overpopulation problem. Pollution, resource depletion, extinctions and carrying capacity are explored, as well as political, psychological, cultural, and technological adaptations. Feedback mechanisms will be proposed and discussed. Students will engage in structured debate and group discussion. This is a communication intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Math 1010, BIOL 1010.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4970 - Non-thesis Research: Independent study program for the purpose of developing research skills under the guidance of a faculty member. This course may be repeated once, and it can count as a biology elective. It may not meet the culminating experience requirement except by special permission of the Biology Department.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 3-12 contact hours.
BIOL 4980 - Biomedical Research: Independent research in health sciences, supervised by a faculty member, for the purpose of developing research skills. Such skills include defining a research project, both as a written and oral exercise for a scientific and general audience, and gathering preliminary research data enabling both a written and oral description of the project in the form of a research proposal and an oral defense. Open to students in the accelerated physician-scientist curriculum only. This course is the Culminating Experience for students in this program. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 4990 - Senior Research Thesis: Independent research, supervised by a faculty member, culminating in a written thesis and oral presentation.This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 6100 - From Neuron to Behavior: A detailed survey of important topics in the neurosciences. Some of the topics to be covered in this class are: basic mechanisms of neural signaling (neurophysiology, synaptic transmission, and molecular signaling; understanding of sensation/movement and in particular how it relates to neuroanatomy; neurodevelopment and how the mature brain can change (plasticity); and complex brain functions and neurological disease. Students prepare analyses and make a presentation of a paper in the original literature. Since there is overlap associated with the 4100 course, both courses may not be taken for credit.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BIOL 1010, BIOL 2120 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 6260 - Advanced Cell Biology: This course is designed to enable students to understand how an organism functions at the cellular and molecular level, and further, how this functioning is regulated so that cells can adapt to changes in their environment. Students will learn the fundamental components of the cell (from protein to organelle), their characteristics, and how these components function in both normal and diseased cells. Students will also learn biochemical, structural, and mechanical aspects of cell functioning and regulation in normal and diseased cells. In addition, students will learn to critically read current scientific literature. By reading current literature, students will gain knowledge of the practice and presentation of science, as well as learn about new techniques and findings. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and BIOL 4260.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: An undergraduate Introduction to Cell Biology course (BIOL 2120 equivalent). Coursework in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology will be helpful, as well.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 6310 - Microbiology: Microbiology is the study of microscopic organisms, including members of all the kingdoms of life. The course has two objectives: 1) Provide an overview of the diversity, genetics, and physiology of microorganisms. 2) Review current topics of investigation in Microbiology in detail. Microbes will be studied from a cellular and molecular perspective. This includes structure, nutrition, growth, control, classification, and genetics. This course will provide BIOLOGY STUDENTS the necessary background in bacterial genetics, pathogenic microbiology, prokaryotic physiology, eukaryotic microbiology, molecular biology and microbial ecology.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 4310. Students may not obtain credit for both this course and BIOL 4310.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours



BIOL 6350 - Virology: This course will provide an exploration of the essential aspects of virology. Introductory examination of viral structure, entry, and replication for each of the major classes of viruses serve as a foundation. Case studies will examine virus host interactions and strategies for prevention and intervention of viral infection. Additional topics include: emerging viruses, viral detection, viral extinction, beneficial use of viruses, modified viruses as research tools.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BIOL 4620 and BIOL 4310 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 4350. A student cannot get credit for both BIOL 4350 and BIOL 6350.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 6360 - Geomicrobiology: This course examines relationships between microorganisms and Earth processes. Topics include the origins of life on earth, surface metabolism theory, biological and biochemical benchmarks. Earth is considred as a microbial habitat with an emphasis on the lithosphere and hydrosphere, including soils, seawater, lakes, rivers, and groundwater. Geomicrobial processes are discussed with an emphasis on microbes as catalysts of geochemical processes including conversion of inorganics and metals, and mineralization of organics. Molecular and non-molecular methods for detection, isolation, and identification of geo-microbially active organisms are introduced.Prerequisites/Corequisites: BIOL 1010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: spring term annually.Cross Listed: Credit cannot be obtained for both BIOL 4360 and BIOL6360. Cross listed as ENVE 4360 /6360. Students cannot obtain credit for both ENVE 4360/6360 and BIOL 4360/6360.Credit Hours: 3
BIOL 6410 - Sequence Analysis:  This course covers the theory and practice of biological sequence analysis, including algorithms for pairwise sequence alignment, multiple sequence alignment, phylogenetic analysis, and database searching. Concepts covered include homology, sequence similarity, parsimony, mechanisms and metrics of molecular evolution, biological data bases, database search algorithms (BLAST), and statistical significance. Selected topics include hidden Markov models, bootstrap analysis, and gene finding. Modern sequence analysis software will be provided. Laptop computers are required. Knowledge of a programming language is strongly suggested. Meets jointly with BIOL 4540; both cannot be taken for credit.Prerequisites/Corequisites:  MATH 1020, BIOL 4620, CSCI 1200 or equilavent, or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 6420 - Molecular Modeling: This course covers the theory and practice of the structural modeling of proteins and other biomolecules using informatics-driven and energy-based approaches. Topics include template-based comparative modeling, secondary structure prediction, tertiary structure prediction, protein classification, sidechain rotamers, docking, protein design, energy minimization, electrostatics, molecular dynamics, and molecular surfaces. Molecular modeling software will be provided. Laptop computers are required. BIOL 4550, BIOL 6420, BCBP 4550, and BCBP 6420 meet jointly; only one of these courses can be taken for credit.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MATH 1020, BIOL 4620, BIOL 4760.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 4550/6420, BCBP 4550/6420.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 6510 - Biology Core Course 1: An intensive course designed to provide instruction and stimulate discussion on important topics in biological research. It is loosely divided into 4 modules: 1) ethics, writing, and basic computational biology tools; 2) structural and computational biology; 3) protein and carbohydrate structure and function; 4) microbiology, ecology, and evolution. Students will gain a fundamental understanding of major topics in biology through formal didactic instruction and selected readings from the primary literature.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Completed bachelors degree or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 6520 - Biology Core Course II: An intensive course designed to provide instruction and stimulate discussion on important topics in biological research. It is loosely divided into three modules: 1) molecular biology and genetics; 2) cell biology; and 3) entrepreneurship/leadership. Students will gain a fundamental understanding of major topics in biology through formal didactic instruction and selected readings from the primary literature. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: This is a continuation of the fall course BIOL 6510. Completed bachelors degree or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BIOL 6550 - Ethical Issues in BiotechnologyThis course reviews the principles of ethical behavior and responsible conduct of research and discusses specific areas of biotechnology research, medical research, and societal issues in the context of these principles. Representative topics include genetic engineering, stem cell research, assisted reproduction, human subjects, animal research, and nanotechnology. Active student participation is expected.
BIOL 6640 - Proteomics: Characterization of patterns and changes in patterns of protein expression with development, aging, and disease. Protein separation and quantification strategies; mass spectrometry and analysis of spectra; protein profiling, biomarkers, post-translational modifications; current applications; emerging technologies and applications. Individual presentations on relevant topics will be expected.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BCBP 4760 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 4640, BCBP 4640, BCBP 6640. Students cannot obtain credit for this course and BCBP 4640, BIOL 4640, or BCBP 6640.Credit Hours: 3
BIOL 6660 - Muscle Mechanics and Modeling: This graduate/advanced undergraduate hybrid course examines the structural and physiologic properties of muscle, as well as its force production and overall biomechanical function. Muscle structure and function will be explored at the protein, single fiber, and whole tissue levels. Discussions will focus primarily on skeletal muscle, and topics will include muscle morphology, cross-bridge theory, molecular motor and actomyosin interaction, Hill-type and Huxley-type models, electromyography, fatigue, muscle inhibition, history-dependent phenomena, in vitro and in vivo muscle function, and the response to injury. Each topic will be introduced and developed utilizing seminal articles in the literature as well as excerpts from texts, and further discussion on current problems and state-of-the-art experimental techniques will draw on the current scientific literature.
BIOL 6680 - Applied and Environmental Microbiology: A survey of applied aspects of microbiology including the application of microorganisms in industrial processes and the roles played by microorganisms in the environment. Emphasis is placed on ways in which microorganisms can be manipulated and controlled for human advantage. Current literature regarding manipulation and regulation of microbial activities is discussed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 4310 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
BIOL 6690 - Advanced Molecular Biology: Students will use a variety of tools (textbooks, scientific journals, and Internet resources including molecular databases and data mining tools) to increase understanding of genes, their expression, their products, and their inter-relatedness. (Meets together with BIOL 4630.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Undergraduate course in molecular biology, molecular genetics, and/or molecular biochemistry.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 4630. Both cannot be taken for credit.Credit Hours: 3
BIOL 6900 - Seminar in Biology: Weekly discussion of selected topics in biology by graduate students and staff.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
BIOL 6910 - Research Rotation l: The students take active part in research, under the supervision of a Biology faculty adviser by mutual agreement.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Restricted to first year Biology graduate students.When Offered: Fall term annually.Graded: S/UCredit Hours: 4
BIOL 6920 - Research Rotation ll: The student will perform hands-on research in the lab of a Biology faculty member to learn basic research methods and techniques, accomplish a small research project and determine whether the lab is a good fit for thesis research.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Restricted to first year Biology graduate students.When Offered: Spring term annually.Graded: S/UCredit Hours: 2
BIOL 6930 - Research Rotation lll: The student will perform hands-on research in the lab of a Biology faculty member to learn basic research methods and techniques, accomplish a small research project and determine whether the lab is a good fit for thesis research.When Offered: Spring term annually.Graded: S/UCredit Hours: 2
BIOL 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.Credit Hours: 1-9
BIOL 6990 - Masters Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a masters thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the library.Credit Hours: 2 to 9
BIOL 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
BMED 2100 - Biomaterials Science and Engineering: Presents structure-property relationships of implant materials including metals, polymers, ceramics, and composites, with an emphasis on mechanical and surface properties in the broader context of implant design. Biological performance of biomaterials, case studies of traditional implants—as well as emerging, tissue-engineered materials— are emphasized.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BMED 2300 - Bioimaging and Bioinstrumentation: This course serves as an introduction to biomedical instrumentation and imaging with focus on the acquisition and monitoring of vital signals. Basic principles for the selection and appropriate use of instruments for solving bioengineering and medical problems such as microscopy, magnetic resonance imaging, and ultrasounds, among others are addressed. Prerequisites/Corequisites: PHYS 1200.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BMED 2540 - Biomechanics: Application of mechanics to the study of normal, diseased, and traumatized musculo-skeletal system. Areas covered include determination of joint and muscle forces, mechanical properties of biological tissues, and structural analysis of bone-implant systems. Case studies are discussed to illustrate the role of biomechanics and biomaterials in the design of implants.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 1100.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BMED 2940 - Studies in Biomedical Engineering: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BMED 2960 - Topics in Biomedical Engineering: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BMED 4010 - Biomedical Engineering Laboratory: Theory and practice of biomedical measurements. An introduction to instrumentation and procedures for measurement of membrane transport, bioelectrical potentials, cell counting, biomechanical and biomaterial properties using invasive and noninvasive techniques. Transducers studied include strain gauge, differential transformer, spectrophometer, bipotential electrodes, microscope with camera, mechanical testing machine, piezoelectric transducer (or sensor). Also studied are instruments for determination of material properties.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite:  BMED 4200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
BMED 4200 - Modeling of Biomedical SystemsIntroduction of mathematical and computational methods to model physiological systems in biomedical engineering. Mathematical methods include solution techniques for systems of algebraic equations, systems of partial and partial differential equations. Computational methods include finite difference, finite element, and lumped parameter methods. Computational methods are programmed using commercial programming software.
BMED 4260 - Biomedical Product Development and Commercialization: Students are introduced to the major biomedical industries, markets, and stakeholders, with an emphasis on biomedical devices. Market drivers and hurdles are covered including regulatory, intellectual property, and reimbursement. The interactive class format includes case studies and industry experts providing a practical perspective. Students select topic areas for design projects and begin work toward the goal of developing functional design solutions to practical biomedical problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: Senior BME status and ENGR 2050.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4410 - BioMEMs: This course discusses state-of-the-art techniques in patterning biomolecules, biosensors, machining three-dimensional microstructures, and building microfluidic devices (Lab-on-a-Chip). Seminal and current literature will be used to discuss topics in BioMEMs ranging from device fabrication to applications in cell biology and medicine. Students cannot get credit for both BMED 4410 and BMED 6410.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: junior/senior standing.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4420 - Clinical Orthopaedics and Contemporary Research: An in-depth review of the underlying science, engineering, medicine, and contemporary research related to the nations highest priorities for musculoskeletal diseases and care. Musculoskeletal anatomy, pathophysiology, epidemiology, and contemporary treatments are covered. Special topics will be presented relating state-of-the-art biomedical research to clinical practice. The clinical perspective of each topic will be presented by practicing clinicians with case studies. Topics conclude with live webcasts or recorded surgery from Albany Medical Center or the Capital Region Bone and Joint Center. Students can not get credit for both BMED 4420 and BMED 6420.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BMED 4500 and senior standing or permission from InstructorWhen Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BMED 4440 - Biophotonics: Biophotonics, or biomedical optics, is a newly developing field, dealing with the application of optical science and technology to biomedical problems, including clinical applications. The course introduces students to the fundamentals in modern and classical optics, light-matter interaction and provides them with a broad overview of current topics and contemporary research in the area of optics and lasers in medicine and biology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1200.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: With BMED 6440.  Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4450 - Drug and Gene Delivery: The course presents several aspects of drug and gene delivery including: 1) definitions of what drugs or gene are; 2) pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics; 3) biomaterial selection considerations; 4) bioactivity considerations; 5) physiological and biochemical barriers to drug delivery; 6) diffusion controlled, dissolution controlled, and osmotic controlled drug delivery systems; 7) polymeric delivery systems; 8) ligand-based targeting and physical targeting; 9) viral mediated gene delivery; 10) non-viral gene delivery; 11) polymers in gene delivery.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BMED 2100 or equivalent, senior standing, or instructor permission.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4460 - Biological Imaging Analysis: Survey of image analysis applications in biology and biotechnology; introduction to biological microscopy and selected biomedical imaging systems; image reconstruction and pre-processing; grayscale and geometric corrections; image segmentation; blob analysis, cell/colony counting, and cell morphometry; vessel and neuron tracing algorithms with applications to neurobiology and medicine; feature extraction, pattern analysis, cluster analysis and classification; image registration algorithms with applications to mosaicing, spatial referencing, motion estimation, and change detection.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BMED 2300<span style="color:#0000ff;font-family:calibri;font-size:18pt;">.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4500 - Advanced Systems Physiology: Applications of control theory and systems techniques to physiology. Emphasis is on entire systems and their interactions rather than isolated phenomena. Areas covered include cardiac, respiratory, renal, and gastrointestinal systems. Includes laboratory on the application of engineering techniques in the study of physiological systems. This course is taught at Albany Medical Center and enrollment is limited to BME students.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BIOL 2120 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BMED 4510 - Mechanobiology: Mechanical regulation of biological systems. Topics include principles and concepts of mechanobiology; evolution, embryogenesis and histogenesis of tissues with particular references to skeletal system; mechanical regulation of cellular behavior, tissue growth and organ development; concept and application of strain energy regulation in biology; application of mechanobiology to tissue regeneration; limits of mechanical regulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BMED 2540 (Biomechanics) or permission from instructor (non-BME students).When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4540 - Biomechanics II: Examines biomechanics of human body movement through developing various models (e.g., lumped mass, planar rigid body, 3D) and exploring current techniques in Forward and Inverse Dynamic approaches. Topics are developed on a classical mechanics foundation, and simulations are constructed using software (e.g., OpenSIM) to describe normal movements, and investigate possible sources of abnormalities due to injury, disease, or dysfunction.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  BMED 2540 or equivalent, junior/senior standing or instructor permission.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
BMED 4550 - Cell Biomechanics: This is an undergraduate/graduate course on the mechanics of biopolymers, cell cytoskeleton, cell membrane, the whole cell, and multicellular structures in the context of the modulation of cell function by mechanical stresses. Topics include state-of-the-art experimental techniques in cell biomechanics, and cutting-edge research in stem cell mechanobiology, cell motility, collective cell behavior, neurite growth, osteocyte sensing, cardiovascular diseases, and immunology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BMED 2540 or equivalant.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with BMED 6550. Students cannot received credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4580 - Biomedical Fluid Mechanics: This course covers the dynamics of fluid flow in human physiological system. Engineering principles and fluid dynamic concepts will be taught in the context of cardiovascular system. Topics include: pulsatile flow in arteries, vascular compliance and wave propagation, impedance, cardiac mechanics, dynamic coupling of ventricle and systemic circulation, blood flow in vein, coronary circulation, microcirculation, blood flow at complex geometries, imaging techniques in clinical hemodynamic assessment, fluid mechanics in designing and testing circulatory implants.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2250 and a basic knowledge of human physiology.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: This course is cross listed as BMED 6480. Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4590 - Medical Imaging: This course serves as an in-depth overview to medical imaging modalities. First, individual modalities are introduced, including CT, MRI, PET, SPECT, and US. Then, multimodality systems are described. A balance is made among physical, mathematical, algorithmic and architectural contents. Contemporary research and insights to improve the current systems are introduced throughout the course to inspire students and provide an understanding of newer tools under development.   Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BMED 2300 or approval of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with BMED 6590. Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4600 - Biomedical Engineering Design: A guided approach to development of design skills. Students work individually and in teams to tackle a biomedical design problem using methods drawn as necessary from engineering and from the physical and mathematical sciences. Discussion sessions involve students in presentations of work. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: senior standing.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4650 - Intro to Cell and Tissue Engineering: The principles and practice of tissue engineering are taught in this course. The principles underlying strategies for employing selected cells, biomaterial scaffolds, soluble regulators or their genes, and biomechanical loading and culture conditions, for the regeneration of tissues and organs in vitro and in vivo are addressed.  Bioreactors, enabling technology and biomimetic approach for fabricating tissue-engineered products and devices for implantation are taught. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: a basic course in mechanics (ENGR 2530 or BMED 2540), and a basic course in transport phenomena or fluid dynamics (ENGR 2250 or equivalent), or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4660 - Muscle Mechanics and Modeling: This graduate/advanced undergraduate hybrid course examines the structural and physiologic properties of muscle, as well as its force production and overall biomechanical function. Muscle structure and function will be explored at the protein, single fiber, and whole tissue levels. Discussions will focus primarily on skeletal muscle, and topics will include muscle morphology, cross-bridge theory, molecular motor and actomyosin interaction, Hill-type and Huxley-type models, electromyography, fatigue, muscle inhibition, history-dependent phenomena, in vitro and in vivo muscle function, and the response to injury. Each topic will be introduced and developed utilizing seminal articles in the literature as well as excerpts from texts and further discussion on current problems and state-of-the-art experimental techniques will draw on the current scientific literature.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: senior standing or permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 4720 - Applied Mathematical Methods in Materials: <p style="text-align:justify;">Students apply mathematical and numerical techniques to understand materials engineering topics such as materials structure, symmetry, diffusion, mechanics and physics of solids. Class uses examples from materials science and engineering core courses to introduce mathematical concepts and materials-related problem solving skills. Topics include linear algebra, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, quadratic forms, tensor operations, symmetry operations, calculus of several variables, ordinary and partial differential equations, Fourier analysis, integral transformations, numerical methods and calculus of variations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2400, and access to Mathematica.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: MTLE 4720.
BMED 4940 - Studies in Biomedical Engineering: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BMED 4960 - Topics in Biomedical Engineering: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BMED 6410 - BioMEMs: This course discusses state-of-the-art techniques in patterning biomolecules, biosensors, machining three-dimensional microstructures and building microfluidic devices (Lab-on-a-Chip). Seminal and current literature will be used to discuss topics in BioMEMs ranging from device fabrication to applications in cell biology and medicine. Students cannot get credit for both BMED 4410 and BMED 6410.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 6420 - Clinical Orthopaedics and Contemporary Research: An in-depth review of the underlying science, engineering, medicine, and contemporary research related to the nations highest priorities for musculoskeletal diseases and care. Musculoskeletal anatomy, pathophysiology, epidemiology, and contemporary treatments are covered. Special topics will be presented relating state-of-the-art biomedical research to clinical practice. The clinical perspective of each topic will be presented by practicing clinicians with case studies. Topics conclude with live Webcasts or recorded surgery from Albany Medical Center or the Capital Region Bone and Joint Center. Students cannot get credit for both BMED 4420 and BMED 6420.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  BMED 4500 and senior standing or permission from instructor.
BMED 6440 - Biophotonics: Biophotonics, or biomedical optics, is a newly developing field, dealing with the application of optical science and technology to biomedical problems, including clinical applications. The course introduces students to the fundamentals in modern and classical optics, light-matter interaction and provides them with a broad overview of current topics and contemporary research in the area of optics and lasers in medicine and biology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisisite: PHYS 1200.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: With BMED 4440.  Students cannot recieve credit for both.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 6450 - Drug and Gene Delivery: The course presents several aspects of drug and gene delivery including: 1) definitions of what drugs or gene are; 2) pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics; 3) biomaterial selection considerations; 4) bioactivity considerations; 5) physiological and biochemical barriers to drug delivery; 6) diffusion controlled, dissolution controlled, and osmotic controlled drug delivery systems; 7) polymeric delivery systems; 8) ligand-based targeting and physical targeting; 9) viral mediated gene delivery; 10) non-viral gene delivery; 11) polymers in gene delivery.
BMED 6460 - Biological Imaging Analysis:  Survey of image analysis applications in biology and biotechnology; introduction to biological microscopy and selected biomedical imaging systems; image reconstruction and pre-processing; grayscale and geometric corrections; image segmentation; blob analysis, cell/colony counting, and cell morphometry; vessel and neuron tracing algorithms with applications to neurobiology and medicine; feature extraction, pattern analysis, cluster analysis and classification; image registration algorithms with applications to mosaicing, spatial referencing, motion estimation, and change detection. When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 6480 - Biomedical Fluid Mechanics: This course covers the dynamics of fluid flow in human physiological system. Engineering principles and fluid dynamic concepts will be taught in the context of cardiovascular system. Topics include: pulsatile flow in arteries, vascular compliance and wave propagation, impedance, cardiac mechanics, dynamic coupling of ventricle and systemic circulation, blood flow in vein, coronary circulation, microcirculation, blood flow at complex geometries, imaging techniques in clinical hemodynamic assessment, fluid mechanics in designing and testing circulatory implants.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2250 and a basic knowledge of human physiology.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: This course is cross listed as BMED 4580. Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 6500 - Mechanobiology: Mechanical regulation of biological systems will be discussed. Topics include principles and concepts of mechanobiology; embryogenesis and histogenesis of tissues with particular references to skeletal system; physical forces at cellular, tissue, and organ level; mechanical regulation of cellular behavior, tissue growth, and organ development; limits of mechanical regulation; biochemical influences; application of mechanobiology to tissue regeneration.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BMED 2540 or ENGR 2530 with permission from the instructor. Graduate course.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 6550 - Cell Biomechanics: This is an undergraduate/graduate course on the mechanics of biopolymers, cell cytoskeleton, cell membrane, the whole cell, and multicellular structures in the context of the modulation of cell function by mechanical stresses. Topics include state-of-the-art experimental techniques in cell biomechanics, and cutting-edge research in stem cell mechanobiology, cell motility, collective cell behavior, neurite growth, osteocyte sensing, cardiovascular diseases, and immunology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: BMED 2540 or equivalant.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with BMED 4550. Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 6590 - Medical Imaging: This course serves as an in-depth overview to medical imaging modalities. First, individual modalities are introduced, including CT, MRI, PET, SPECT, and US. Then, multimodality systems are described. A balance is made among physical, mathematical, algorithmic and architectural contents. Contemporary research and insights to improve the current systems are introduced throughout the course to inspire students and provide an understanding of newer tools under development.
BMED 6650 - Intro to Cell and Tissue Engineering: The principles and practice of tissue engineering are taught in this course. The principles underlying strategies for employing selected cells, biomaterial scaffolds, soluble regulators or their genes, and biomechanical loading and culture conditions, for the regeneration of tissues and organs in vitro and in vivo are addressed. Bioreactor, enabling technology, and biomimetic approach for fabricating tissue-engineered products and devices for implantation are taught. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: a basic course in mechanics (ENGR 2530 or BMED 2540), and a basic course in transport phenomena or fluid dynamics (ENGR 2250 or equivalent) or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term anually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 6660 - Muscle Mechanics and Modeling: This graduate/advanced undergraduate hybrid course examines the structural and physiologic properties of muscle, as well as its force production and overall biomechanical function. Muscle structure and function will be explored at the protein, single fiber and whole tissue levels. Discussions will focus primarily on skeletal muscle, and topics will include muscle morphology, cross-bridge theory, molecular motor and actomyosin interaction, Hill-type and Huxley-type models, electromyography, fatigue, muscle inhibition, history-dependent phenomena, in vitro and in vivo muscle function, and the response to injury. Each topic will be introduced and developed utilizing seminal articles in the literature as well as excerpts from texts, and further discussion on current problems and state-of-the-art experimental techniques will draw on the current scientific literature.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: senior standing or permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 6700 - Ethical Issues in Biotechnology: This discussion course reviews the principles of ethical behavior and responsible conduct of research and then discusses specific areas of biotechnology research, medical research, and societal issues in the context of these principles. Representative topics include genetic engineering, stem cell research, assisted reproduction, human subjects, animal research, and nanotechnology. Class performance is dependent on active participation and discussion, student presentations, and the submission of analytical essays.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
BMED 6800 - Discussions in Graduate Research: This is a seminar based graduate level course that provides (a) a broad exposure to contemporary topics of research in biomedical engineering by recognized experts in the field and; (b) hands-on exposure on various aspects of professional development to Ph.D. students including conference/thesis presentations, writing scientific manuscripts and pre-doctoral and post-doctoral fellowship grant applications. Students are required to attend and participate in the departmental seminar and present their own research and grant proposals.
BMED 6940 - Studies in Biomedical Engineering: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BMED 6960 - Topics in Biomedical Engineering: New courses or special course offerings are given under this number from time to time. Graduate students in biomedical engineering may pursue special interests under this number when sponsored by a biomedical engineering faculty member and with the permission of the department.When Offered: By individual arrangement.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
BMED 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
BMED 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the Master’s Project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
BMED 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
BMED 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
CHEM 1100 - Chemistry IPrinciples of chemistry, with particular focus on atomic and molecular structure and bonding, periodicity, basic thermodynamic principles, introduction to acid-base chemistry and elementary chemical equilibrium, and introduction to organic chemistry. Students cannot get credit for both this course and CHEM 1110.
CHEM 1110 - Chemistry I with Advanced Lab: Covers the same lecture material as CHEM 1100, but laboratory experiments will be more technique-oriented to provide better preparation for students who plan to take future laboratory courses in chemistry.  Students cannot get credit for both this course and CHEM 1100.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 1200 - Chemistry II: Continued examination of the principles of chemistry in more depth, considering thermodynamics, advanced concepts in chemical equilibrium and acid-base chemistry, kinetics of chemical reactions, and electrochemistry.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 1100 or CHEM 1110.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 1600 - Materials ScienceIntroduction to the scientific principles that dictate the structure and properties of engineering materials, including metals, ceramics, semiconductors, and polymers. Physical properties of materials (mechanical, electrical, thermal, optical) are discussed in terms of the underlying structure, spanning multiple length scales from atomic packing to micron scale defects, in practical engineering materials. Throughout the course, the material behaviors are understood from the viewpoint of thermodynamics and kinetics.
CHEM 2030 - Inorganic Chemistry I: Descriptive chemistry of the elements. Properties, structures, and typical reactions of the elements of the periodic table and their compounds; basic principles of inorganic chemistry.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 1200 or ENGR 1600.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 2110 - Equilibrium Chemistry and Quantitative Analysis: This course will cover principles of equilibrium chemistry (particularly solubility and acid-base chemistry) and its application to chemical analysis. Applications of equilibrium chemistry in the fields of geology, environmental science, biology, and biochemistry will be included.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 1200 or CHEM 4530.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 2120 - Experimental Chemistry I: Analytical Techniques: A laboratory course dealing with wet and instrumental techniques of chemical analysis.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: CHEM 2110.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
CHEM 2230 - Organic Chemistry Laboratory I: Laboratory experiments dealing with basic techniques used in the synthesis and characterization of organic compounds.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Pre- or corequisite: CHEM 2250 or a similar course in organic chemistry.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
CHEM 2240 - Organic Chemistry Laboratory II: A continuation of CHEM 2230, which is a prerequisite.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2230 and CHEM 2260 or a similar course in organic chemistry should be taken with or prior to this course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1
CHEM 2250 - Organic Chemistry IStructure and chemical behavior of organic molecules with particular emphasis on reaction mechanisms as pathways for understanding their reactions. Stereochemistry, synthesis, and spectroscopic methods for the identification of organic functional groups are among the topics included.
CHEM 2260 - Organic Chemistry II: A continuation of CHEM 2250, which is a prerequisite.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2250.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 2290 - Experimental Chemistry II: Synthesis and Characterization: Laboratory experiments dealing with the synthesis and characterization of chemical compounds and practical experience in accessing the chemistry literature. Primary emphasis is organic chemistry. Intended for chemistry majors.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: CHEM 2260.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 2360 - Chemistry Laboratory: Selected Experiments: A selection of experiments taken primarily from other chemistry laboratory courses. Intended to permit an individualized laboratory course to be set up to enable transfer students to make up deficiencies in their laboratory background, to allow students from other departments to obtain experience in areas of interest to them, and to provide a course that students from other schools can use to fulfill laboratory requirements of their home institution on a transfer basis. Selection of experiments and credits determined by individual consultation with the academic adviser and instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: Arranged.
CHEM 2440 - Physical Chemistry for Life Sciences: Topics in physical chemistry that are important for understanding processes in biological systems. Included are: thermodynamics as applied to phase and chemical equilibria in chemical and biochemical systems; passive transport models for diffusion and electrical conductivity in electrolyte solutions; kinetic models for simple and complex chemical reactions, including enzyme mechanisms; quantum mechanical models used in spectroscopy.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 1200 and MATH 1010.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 2540 - Introduction to Geochemistry: An introduction to the application of chemistry to the understanding of problems in the earth and environmental sciences. Topics include thermodynamics and phase equilibria as applied to mineral stability, rock evolution, and water chemistry; stable isotope systematics; radiogenic isotope systematics, trace element geochemistry, organic geochemistry, and geochemical cycles.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ERTH 1100 and/or ERTH 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ERTH 2140. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ERTH 2140.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 2930 - Out-of-Classroom Experience in Chemistry: Students may obtain credit for chemistry-related experience in nonclassroom situations. For credit to be awarded, a brief proposal outlining the nature of the experience to be undertaken must be given to the department in advance for approval of its suitability. A written report is required at the end of the experience. A maximum of 4 credits is allowed, but this may be made up in more than one experience.Graded: Graded Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
CHEM 2940 - Special Projects in Chemistry: Study and experimental work in various fields of chemistry to develop an interest in and ability for independent study and investigation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
CHEM 2950 - Undergraduate Research: Hands-on research in a faculty research laboratory.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
CHEM 4010 - Inorganic Chemistry II: A course dealing with more advanced topics of inorganic chemistry, including molecular symmetry, application of symmetry concepts to molecular orbital descriptions of polyatomic molecules, solid state and non-stoichiometric compounds, coordination chemistry, spectral and magnetic properties, organometallic chemistry, and bioinorganic chemistry.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2030; it is recommended that CHEM 4410 be taken concurrently.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 4020 - Experimental Chemistry III: Inorganic and Physical Methods: Laboratory exploration including synthesis and characterization of several types of inorganic compounds, with emphasis on the use of physical methods in inorganic chemistry. Communication of results in written and oral form is an integral part of the course. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisites: CHEM 4010 and CHEM 4410.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 4110 - Instrumental Methods of Analysis: This course will introduce advanced instrumental physicochemical methods of chemical analysis and will include such topics as separations (chromatography), atomic spectroscopy, molecular spectroscopy, and electroanalytical chemistry. Non-majors, particularly those in Biochemistry and Engineering (Biomedical, Environmental, etc. except Chemical Engineering) are encouraged to take this course. Chemistry majors should register for CHEM 4120 concurrently.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 2110 and CHEM 2120 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
CHEM 4120 - Experimental Chemistry IV: Physical and Instrumental Methods: A laboratory course emphasizing the hands-on use of modern instrumental methods in analytical and physical chemistry applications, and the interpretation and discussion of the results obtained from them. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Experiments depend on the theoretical material in CHEM 4110 and CHEM 4420, which are corequisites.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 4300 - Medicinal Chemistry: Organic and medicinal chemistry play a crucial role in the discovery of agents used to treat human disease. The basis of this course is the study of the drug discovery process from the perspective of these chemical disciplines. Concepts to be studied are molecular targeted drug discovery, lead compound identification and optimization, biophysical and molecular modeling tools, biological barriers to drug action and ways chemistry can overcome them, and the biotech industry. Topics pertinent to drug development such as drug metabolism and clinical research will also be discussed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2260 or permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 4310 - Bioorganic Mechanisms: The study of mechanisms of organic reactions in biochemical processes on a molecular level. Enzyme active sites, mechanisms of enzymatic transformations, catalysis, cofactors, enzyme kinetics, environmental toxicology. Strong emphasis on the design and mechanism of action of pharmaceutical agents. Meets with CHEM 6310; both courses cannot be taken for credit.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2260 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 4330 - Drug Discovery: This course will examine how bioinformatics, functional genomics, and other modern biotechnologies are used to speed the discovery of new drugs, especially those small organic molecules to treat human diseases with large unmet therapeutic need. Special emphasis will be placed on molecular target identification and validation as well as high-throughput screening to identify a lead. Topics to be discussed will include transgenic mice, RNA interference, DNA and protein microarrays, homogenous time-resolved fluorescence bioassays, phage-display, combinatorial chemistry, and parallel synthesis. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and CHEM 6330.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 2260 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 4410 - Macroscopic Physical Chemistry: A course dealing with physicochemical properties of substances on a macroscopic scale. Chemical thermodynamics, electrochemistry, electric and magnetic phenomena, transport properties, and surface and colloid chemistry.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 4420 - Microscopic Physical Chemistry: A course dealing primarily with physicochemical properties of substances on a molecular basis. Chemical kinetics, quantum chemistry, spectroscopy, and statistical mechanics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2400.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 4470 - Theoretical Chemistry: Introduction to quantum mechanics and applications in chemical systems. Atomic and molecular spectra and structure. Statistical thermodynamics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 4410.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 4530 - Modern Techniques in Chemistry: A lecture/laboratory course for Chemical Engineering students. Discusses the principles and applications of modern instrumental methods of chemical analysis and provides laboratory experience in their use along with other chemical techniques. Principles of analytical, organic, and physical chemistry will be illustrated throughout the course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 2250.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 4620 - Introduction to Polymer ChemistryThis course will introduce synthetic and kinetic aspects of various polymerization reactions that have been employed to produce commodity and specialty plastic materials. Control and prediction of the molecular weight distribution for different polymerization mechanisms will be discussed along with various characterization techniques of molecular weight distribution and its relation to properties. Thermal/solution properties, chemical/physical properties, and uses of polymers also will be discussed.
CHEM 4690 - Aqueous Geochemistry: Fundamentals of aqueous chemistry as applied to the evolution of natural waters. The course covers principles of chemical equilibrium, activity models for solutes, pH as a master variable, concentration and Eh-pH diagrams, mineral solubility, aqueous complexes, ion exchange, and stable isotopes. The carbonate system, weathering reactions, and acid rain are examined in detail. Emphasis is on the chemical reactions that control surface and groundwater evolution in natural and engineered (treatment process) settings. Students learn theory, computation methods, and the use of computer programs for calculation of speciation and mass balance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ENVE 4110 and ERTH 4690. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and either ERTH 4690 or ENVE 4110.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 4760 - Molecular Biochemistry IPart I of a two-semester sequence focusing on the chemistry, structure, and function of biological molecules, macromolecules, and systems. Topics covered include protein and nucleic acid structure, enzymology, mechanisms of catalysis, regulation, lipids and membranes, carbohydrates, bioenergetics, and carbohydrate metabolism. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and either BIOL 4760 or BCBP 4760.)Prerequisites/Corequisites:  CHEM 2250 and BIOL 1010 or BIOL 2120 or equivalents.
CHEM 4770 - Molecular Biochemistry II: The second semester of the Molecular Biochemistry sequence. Topics include lipids and lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism and the coenzymes involved in this metabolism, nucleic acid synthesis and chemistry, protein synthesis and degradation, integration of metabolism, photobiology, and photosynthesis. This course is taught in studio mode. (Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and either BIOL 4770 or BCBP 4770.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 4760 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 4810 - Chemistry of the Environment: Chemical processes important in the environment from naturally occurring and man-induced systems. Thermodynamic and chemical considerations of fuels; the thermodynamics of the atmosphere; atmospheric photochemistry; chemistry of natural water systems; chemistry of pesticides, fertilizers, and other important environmental contaminants; aspects of the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 1200 and one prior or concurrent course in organic chemistry or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ERTH 4810. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ERTH 4810.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 4900 - Professional Development Seminar: Weekly seminars on topics of concern to students who are about to embark on their professional careers in Chemistry. Topics will include employment and career opportunities; graduate school; ethical requirements and expectations in the profession; patent considerations; new directions in research and other topical matters. Restricted to senior Chemistry majors. When Offered: Fall term annually.Graded: S/UCredit Hours: 1Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 1
CHEM 4950 - Senior Experience: As a confirmation of their ability to integrate their knowledge of chemistry to deal with a research problem, students will present a research-style paper and conference-style poster on a research-related topic. This is preferred to be on a prior or ongoing undergraduate research project, but may be a literature review on approval by the instructor.Graded: To be graded S/U.Credit Hours: 2
CHEM 4960 - Selected Topics in Chemistry: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
CHEM 4970 - Advanced Research Project: An independent research project in a faculty research laboratory for junior and senior students with prior research experience. Requires permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1-4



CHEM 4990 - Senior Thesis: A two-semester spring-fall or fall-spring course dealing with an advanced level independent research project supervised by a faculty member and requiring the presentation of a thesis. First term registration is limited to second semester juniors and first semester seniors. The grade for the first semester will be listed as in progress.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 3 credits each semester
CHEM 6010 - Perspectives in Chemistry: The objective of this course is to prepare graduate students for research in chemistry. Topics will include general and universal aspects of research in science, such as the written and oral presentation of scientific findings and the ethical considerations involved in the publication of these findings, and a survey of the current research topics of the department including emphasis on the fundamental science that underlies these topics.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6020 - Advanced Inorganic Chemistry I: Structure and bonding in inorganic molecules and crystals; stabilities of inorganic compounds; coordination chemistry and organometallic compounds; acid-base concepts; nonstoichiometry and phase relationships.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6170 - Advanced Topics in Nuclear Magnetic Resonance: Advanced graduate course covering fundamental aspects of NMR common for application in a broad range of fields. Classical and quantum-mechanical descriptions are utilized to explore information content of NMR pulse sequences. The latter approach includes density matrix theory and proceeds with the product-operator formalism. Practical aspects and data analysis are also described. Subsequent focus is on liquid-state NMR of biological macromolecules, including resonance assignment and determination of molecular structure and dynamics. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and BCBP 6170.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 4410 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHEM 6200 - Organic Spectra Interpretation: Spectra of various kinds are essential tools in modern chemistry. This course will deal with the interpretation of mass, infrared, NMR and UV-visible spectra as applied to the identification and structural characterization of organic compounds.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 3
CHEM 6210 - Advanced Organic Chemistry I: An introduction to the organic chemical literature. A consideration of reactions of synthetic importance to the organic chemist with emphasis on the influence of structure on the behavior of organic molecules.When Offered: A fall-spring sequence annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6250 - Glycochemistry, Glycobiology, and GlychotechnologyThis is an advanced graduate level course on carbohydrates covering their physicochemical properties, chemical and biochemical synthesis and analysis. The biological activity of polysaccharides, glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and glycolipids, and the role of glycomics in development and disease will be discussed. The application of glycotechnology and glycoengineering for the preparation of therapeutic glycans and glycan-coated materials will be covered.
CHEM 6300 - Medicinal Chemistry: The organic chemistry of drug discovery and synthesis will be the focus of this course. Starting with the basic concepts of molecular-targeted drug discovery, the process of lead identification will be explored with special emphasis on drug screening and combinatorial chemistry. The roles of computational chemistry, molecular modeling, and biophysical methods in the understanding of the relationship between structure and biological activity will be studied. The chirality of drugs from both the biological and synthetic perspectives will also be explored.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 6210 or permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6310 - Bioorganic Mechanisms: The study of mechanisms of organic reactions in biochemical processes on a molecular level. Enzyme active sites, mechanisms of enzymatic transformations, catalysis, cofactors, enzyme kinetics, environmental toxicology. Strong emphasis on the design and mechanism of action of pharmaceutical agents. Meets with CHEM 4310; both courses cannot be taken for credit.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6330 - Drug Discovery: This course will examine how bioinformatics, functional genomics, and other modern biotechnologies are used to speed the discovery of new drugs, especially those small organic molecules to treat human diseases with large unmet therapeutic need. Special emphasis will be placed on molecular target identification and validation as well as high-throughput screening to identify a lead. Topics to be discussed will include transgenic mice, RNA interference, DNA and protein microarrays, homogenous time-resolved fluorescence bioassays, phage-display, combinatorial chemistry, and parallel synthesis. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and CHEM 4330.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: a knowledge of organic chemistry is required.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6490 - Chemical Thermodynamics: The principles of thermodynamics, with their applications to homogeneous and heterogeneous equilibria.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6510 - Computational Chemistry: This course is designed to cover the history and application of modern computational chemistry techniques to chemical problems. It will provide familiarity with the various methods and tools presently in use and the assumptions and limitations inherent in each approach. The format involves both lecture and studio modes of instruction and meets in a classroom where each student has a modern workstation.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6520 - Advanced Analytical Chemistry: A course in the principles of analytical chemistry emphasizing the role of equilibrium chemistry in chemical analysis and the statistical design of experiments. Topics covered include equilibrium chemistry, electrochemistry, chromatographic separations, thermal methods, and chemometrics/experimental design.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6530 - Quantum Chemistry: Postulates of quantum mechanics. Solution of the particle in a box, harmonic oscillator, and the hydrogen atom via series solutions and ladder operator techniques. Development of atomic and molecular orbital theories with applications to structure and spectra.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6660 - Polymer Analysis and Characterization: The objective of this course is to provide the student with a broad survey of methods of analysis and characterization of polymers. Thermal analysis, molecular weight characterization, spectroscopy, and mechanical property determination will be reviewed with an emphasis on method of measurement, quantities measured, and quantities derived from the measurements. Select applications will be used to convey the usefulness of these methods for characterizing polymers and their properties.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6710 - Chemical Biology: This course introduces the fundamentals of protein structure and function with an emphasis on chemical concepts and small molecule-protein interactions.  This course focuses on the basic biochemical concepts required for advanced studies in biochemistry and biotechnology and is intended for first year graduate students.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHEM 6750 - Biocatalysis: Fundamentals and ApplicationsThis course provides an introduction to the field of biocatalysis that includes both free enzyme and whole cell processes. Lectures on free enzymes will discuss their catalytic mechanism(s), immobilization and use in aqueous and organic media. Lectures on biocatalytic transformations by whole cells will discuss metabolic pathways to products, fermentation processes, and whole cell immobilization. Integrated within the course will be discussions of the relative merits of biocatalysis vs. chemical catalysis for chemical conversions as well as examples of current uses of biocatalytic processes by industry.
CHEM 6900 - Chemistry Seminar: Credit Hours: 1
CHEM 6910 - Chemistry Teaching Seminar: Discussions and seminars on how to deal with the various aspects of teaching and related problems encountered by teaching assistants in chemistry. Seminar topics will include: cognitive theories of learning; several models of teaching; educational psychology; attitude and motivational factors; communication and presentation skills; leadership; time management; how to write an exam; grading problems; ethics; group problem solving skills; and cultural diversity. Seminars will be led by a senior, experienced teaching assistant along with participating faculty.When Offered: Fall term annually.Graded: Graded Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory only.Credit Hours: 1
CHEM 6940 - Readings in Chemistry: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CHEM 6950 - Introduction to ResearchA course for first semester Chemistry graduate students that involves rotations of four weeks each through three research groups to become familiar with research in the department. Students will participate in various research-related activities, including group meetings, reading papers, exploring potential thesis projects, and shadowing or assisting graduate students working in the lab. The main goal of the course is to assist graduate students in their selection of a research adviser.
CHEM 6960 - Selected Topics in Chemistry: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CHEM 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A professional project often serves as a culminating experience for a professional master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one professional project. Professional projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.Credit Hours: 3 to 4
CHEM 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
CHEM 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the  dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral  committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education, it will be  archived in a standard format in the library.Credit Hours: Variable
CHME 1010 - Introduction to Chemical Engineering: This is an elective course suitable for first-year students interested in chemical engineering. It introduces students to the profession, including the technical content, career opportunities, and societal impact.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
CHME 2010 - Material, Energy, and Entropy Balances: Development of the ability to apply and solve equations of balance for chemical-process systems, laying the foundation for subsequent chemical engineering courses in unit operations and process design. Topics include process flowsheeting, mass and mole balances for nonreactive and reactive systems, properties of fluids, and the first and second laws of thermodynamics.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHME 2020 - Energy, Entropy, and Equilibrium: A continuation of CHME 2010. Topics include process flowsheeting, solution thermodynamics, phase equilibria, chemical-reaction equilibria, and applications of thermodynamics to problems in chemical-process design. One credit hour of this course is devoted to Professional Development.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHME 2010.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHME 2940 - Readings in Chemical Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CHME 2960 - Topics in Chemical Engineering: Credit Hours: 3
CHME 2980 - Senior Project: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CHME 4010 - Transport Phenomena I: An introductory course in transport phenomena covering fluid statics, and one-dimensional diffusive processes including laminar flow, heat conduction, and mass diffusion. Course focuses on developing the equations of change, introducing sum-of-resistance concepts and couple fluid flow, heat transfer, and mass transfer problems. The concept of extended surfaces as a means of enhancing transport process is included. The course introduces numerical simulation concepts for solving simple, one-dimensional transport problems. Credit not allowed for both this course and ENGR 2250.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHME 4020 - Transport Phenomena II: A continuation of CHME 4010. Course includes topics on multi-dimensional transport processes, potential, boundary layer and turbulent fluid flows, convective heat and mass transfer processes, friction factors and drag in and around solid objects, heat and mass exchangers, and radiation heat transfer. The course extends the use of numerical methods to apply to multidimensional problems, convective heat and mass transfer problems, and the simulation of more complicated fluid flows including turbulence approximations. Credit not allowed for both this course and ENGR 2250.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2400 and CHME 4010.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHME 4030 - Chemical Process Dynamics and Control: Introduction to modeling and control of dynamic chemical processes. Topics include the development of first-principles models, linearization and state space form, input/output (transfer function) form, design and tuning of PID controllers, model-based control, frequency response for robustness analysis, case studies in multivariable control, numerical analysis, and simulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHME 4040 - Chemical Engineering Separations: The application of the fundamentals of chemistry, thermodynamics, mathematics, and transport phenomena to the design and evaluation of stage-wise and continuous contacting apparatus and systems for separating and purifying chemical materials. Steady-state and transient processes are studied.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHME 4010 and CHME 4020. Corequisite or prerequisite: CHME 2020.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4050 - Chemical Process Design: The design of equipment, processes, and systems of interest in chemical engineering through application of scientific, technological, and economic principles. The concepts of product design, design for the environment, and the ethical and safety issues of design are introduced. Emphasis is placed on problem formulation and the conceptual, analytical, and decision aspects of open-ended design situations. The work integrates knowledge and skills gained in previous and concurrent courses. This is a communicaion-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHME 4040 and CHME 4500.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CHME 4150 - Chemical Engineering Laboratory I: A two-term laboratory course on experimental analysis of the operations and processes of chemical engineering. Emphasis is placed on planning of experiments, data evaluation, and report writing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHME 4010, CHME 4020, and CHME 2020.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4160 - Chemical Engineering Laboratory II: A two-term laboratory course on experimental analysis of the operations and processes of chemical engineering. Emphasis is placed on planning of experiments, data evaluation, and report writing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHME 4150, CHME 4040, and CHME 4500.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4170 - Bioprocessing Laboratory Course: A one-term laboratory course covering the fundamentals of biotechnology and bioprocessing including molecular biology, fermentation, and protein purification.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: senior standing in chemical and biological engineering. CHME 4430 strongly recommended.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4400 - Chromatographic Separation Processes: Theory and practice of chromatographic separation processes. Topics include chromatographic dispersion, adsorption isotherms, solute movement analysis, chromatographic techniques (reversed-phase, HIC, ion exchange, affinity, and size exclusion), modes of operation (gradient, elution, displacement, and continuous systems), novel morphologies and chromatographic applications in biotechnology. Includes critical reviews of the current literature and computer simulations. Suitable for graduate students in chemical engineering, chemistry, biology, and biomedical engineering. Students cannot receive credit for both CHME 4400 and CHME 6440.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: senior or graduate standing in chemical engineering or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4430 - Introduction to Biochemical Engineering: Description, fundamentals, and engineering features of processes using microbial, plant or animal cells or their enzymes. Topics include review of biochemistry, review of microbiology, computer simulation, growth, death, aseptic techniques, continuous culture, fermenter design, sterilization, mixed cultures, process scale up, immobilized cells and enzymes, recovery of products, and process economics. Weekly exercises requiring personal computers.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: background in chemical engineering or microbiology. Biochemistry strongly recommended.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4460 - Biomolecular Engineering: This course will focus on 1) designing, engineering, and selecting proteins and other biomolecules with desired functional and biophysical properties (high thermal stability, high solubility, low propensity to aggregate), and 2) characterizing thermodynamic and kinetic properties (folding, oligomerization, and self-association) of these biomolecules. (Students may not receive credit for both this course and CHME 6460.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BIOL 1010 or BIOL 2120 or equivalent, and CHME 2020 or ENGR 2250 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4480 - Single Molecules Complex Fluid: This course will focus on the connections between the behavior of single molecules and their interacations and macroscopic non-Newtonian behavior. It will discuss microscopic models of these systems, techniques for measuring and manipulating the microstructure, and the impact on macroscopic behavior. Students may not receive credit for both this course and CHME 6480.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CHME 4020 or equivalent.  Co-current registration with CHME 4020 or equivalent allowed with permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4500 - Chemical Reactor Design: Principles of kinetics, reactor design, and analysis for both homogeneous and heterogeneous (catalytic) systems. Topics include design for multiple reaction networks (optimum selectivity), analysis of simple reactor combinations, and design of isothermal, adiabatic and optimum temperature profile reactor.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHME 2010, CHME 4010, and CHME 4020.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4600 - Introduction to Semiconductor Processing: The basic processes of fabrication of silicon-based semiconductor devices with emphasis on the chemical principles and systems involved. Topics include materials preparation, oxide growth, lithography, diffusion, ion implantation, epitaxial growth, chemical-vapor deposition, vacuum deposition, reactive ion etching, and packaging technologies. Fabrication of both bipolar and FET devices is discussed with emphasis on manufacturing process flow and control. Process design methodology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: senior standing in chemical engineering or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 4940 - Readings in Chemical Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CHME 4960 - Topics in Chemical Engineering: Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6410 - Advanced Membrane Concepts: An in-depth and comprehensive treatment of membrane technology. Membrane preparation and morphology. Models for transport through membranes. Fluid-dynamic phenomena across membrane systems. Particle dynamics, membrane fouling, and concentration polarization. Applications to chemical and biochemical separations. Critical reviews of the current literature.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: a general knowledge of transport phenomena.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6420 - Separation and Recovery Processes: The application of theoretical and fundamental principles and pilot plant data to the design and operation of biochemical separation processes and advanced waste treatment systems. Topics covered include characterization and dispersion, coagulation and flocculation, sedimentation, filtration, adsorption, ion exchange, membrane processes, aeration and gas transfer, centrifugation, and related subjects.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6430 - Biochemical Engineering: Engineering aspects of microbial processes and of conversions with immobilized enzymes. Topics are mixed-culture processes, sterilization, aseptic techniques, mass transfer, bioprocess control, product isolation, enzyme technology, bioprocess development. There are heavy emphases on continuous fermentation and on chemicals from biomass.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: microbiology or assigned reading.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6440 - Chromatographic Separations: Theory and practice of chromatographic separation processes. Topics include chromatographic dispersion, adsorption isotherms, solute movement analysis, chromatographic techniques (reversed-phase, HIC, ion exchange, affinity, and size exclusion), modes of operation (gradient, elution, displacement, and continuous systems), novel morphologies and chromatographic applications in biotechnology. Includes critical reviews of the current literature and computer simulations. Suitable for graduate students in chemical engineering, chemistry, biology, and biomedical engineering. Students cannot receive credit for both CHME 4400 and CHME 6440.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6450 - Advanced Biochemical Engineering: Selected topics beyond the scope of CHME 6430. Particular emphasis on the current literature and the applications of computers and graphics. Extensive coverage is given to purification and separation technology, kinetic analysis, design of bioreactors, exploitation of genetic engineering, and bioprocess development. An individual project is required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHME 6430 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Summer term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6460 - Biomolecular Engineering: This course will focus on 1) designing, engineering, and selecting proteins and other biomolecules with desired functional and biophysical properties (high thermal stability, high solubility, low propensity to aggregate), and 2) characterizing thermodynamic and kinetic properties (folding, oligomerization, and self-association) of these biomolecules. (Students may not receive credit for both this course and CHME 4460.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BIOL 1010 or BIOL 2120 or equivalent, and CHME 2020 or ENGR 2250 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6470 - Downstream Processing in Biochemical Engineering: The course focuses on the concentration, recovery, and isolation of biological molecules relevant in biotechnology. The characteristics of biological molecules such as proteins and biological fluids such as blood, fermentation, and cell culture broth, are discussed. The principles, advantages, and limitations of centrifugation, membranes, cell-disruption, two-phase extraction, precipitation crystallization, and electrical processes are discussed. Integrated bioseparation schemes are presented and many specific applications are discussed in detail.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: a course in biochemical engineering or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6480 - Single Molecules Complex Fluid: This course will focus on the connections between the behavior of single molecules and their interactions and macroscopic non-Newtonian behavior. Among the topics discussed are microscopic models of these systems, techniques for measuring and manipulating the microsctructure, and the impact on macroscopic behavior. Students may not receive credit for both this course and CHME 4480.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CHME 4020 or equivalent.  Co-current registration with CHME 4020 or equivalent allowed with permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6510 - Advanced Transport Phenomena I: Continuity, momentum, and energy equations for continuous fluids; constitutive relations. Kinematics of fluid motion; vorticity and circulation. Potential flow. Navier-Stokes equations. Boundary layer theory. Turbulence. Multicomponent reacting systems. Selected applications.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHME 4010.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6520 - Advanced Transport Phenomena II: A continuation of CHME 6510. Treats irrotational flow, flow around bubbles, and other free surface problems, turbulent flow, jets, and wakes. Presumes an understanding of continuum mechanics, viscous flow, and boundary layer flow.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHME 6510 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6540 - Convective Heat Transfer: A review of basic concepts of mass, momentum, and energy conservation as related to convective heat transfer. The analysis of laminar and turbulent forces and free convection problems in both internal and external flows. Also a study of the current state of the art in boiling and condensation heat transfer.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6570 - Chemical and Phase Equilibria: Classical solution thermodynamics, equations of state, and topics in chemical reaction and phase equilibria. Emphasis is on the rigorous formulation of equilibrium problems, and on the measurement, reduction, correlation, and interpretation of experimental data.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6610 - Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering I: Development and application of mathematical methods for the solution of chemical engineering problems. Classical solution methods for ordinary and partial differential equations. Major emphasis is given to the mathematical implications of describing and solving representation of chemical reactors and other systems. Case studies relevant to other departmental graduate courses and ongoing research activities are discussed. The mathematical methods include series solutions, special function representations, boundary-value problems, and operational calculus.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6620 - Mathematical Methods in Chemical Engineering II: Modern solution techniques including semi-analytical, approximation, and numerical methods are introduced and applied to linear and nonlinear transport phenomena problems and chemical engineering systems. Similarity theory and integral methods, perturbation techniques, and orthogonal collocation, indispensable to chemical engineering, are discussed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHME 6610 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6640 - Advanced Chemical Reactor Design: Analysis of ideal and nonideal chemical reactor operation with simple and multiple homogeneous, heterogeneous, and catalytic reactions. Interplay of chemical and mass, energy and momentum transport processes in model reactors and catalytic particles. Topics include transient and steady-state operation, residence time distribution, multiplicity, stability, selectivity control, and catalyst deactivation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHME 4500 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6650 - Advanced Process Control: Application of modern control theory to chemical processes. Introduction to on-line data acquisition and computer control. Real-time process optimization and optimal control theory. Estimation theory and adaptive control. Introduction to stochastic control and to the control of large-scale distribution systems. Case studies via computer-aided design programs.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHME 4030 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6670 - Advanced Process Design: Process synthesis with applications to heat exchange networks, energy-integrated separation sequences, and reactor networks. Analysis, design, and optimization of large-scale systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: chemical engineering degree or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6830 - CombustionReview of fundamentals of thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, fluid mechanics, and modern diagnostics. Discussion of flame propagation, thermal and chain explosions, stirred reactors, detonations, droplet combustion, and turbulent jet flames.
CHME 6840 - An Introduction to Multiphase Flow and Heat Transfer I: This course is intended to give students a state-of-the-art understanding about single and multicomponent boiling and condensation heat transfer phenomena. Applications include the analysis of nuclear reactors, oil wells, and chemical process equipment. Students satisfactorily completing this course are expected to be able to thoroughly understand the current thermal-hydraulics literature on multiphase heat and mass transfer and be able to conduct independent research in this field.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: a working knowledge of fluid mechanics and heat transfer.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6840. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 6840.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6850 - An Introduction to Multiphase Flow and Heat Transfer II: This course is intended to give students a state-of-the-art understanding in multicomponent flow phenomena. Applications in the chemical process, petroleum recovery, and fossil/nuclear power industries will be given. Specific areas of coverage include two-phase: fluid mechanics, pressure drop, modeling and analysis, stability analysis, critical flow and dynamic waves, flow regime analysis, and phase separation and distribution phenomena.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHME 6840 or MANE 6840.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6850. Students cannot obtain credit for this course and MANE 6850.Credit Hours: 3
CHME 6900 - Chemical and Biological Engineering Seminar: This seminar-based graduate level course provides a broad exposure to the chemical and biological engineering discipline. Attending and participating in seminars from recognized experts will form the core of the course. Topics include energy and the environment, nano and biotechnologies, computational molecular science, polymers and advanced materials, synthetic biology, metabolic engineering, and the future of our discipline. The course is required for chemical engineering Ph.D. students.
CHME 6940 - Readings in Chemical Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CHME 6960 - Topics in Chemical Engineering: State-of the-art formal courses in specialized areas suitable for master’s and doctoral programs. Usually two topics offered per term. Typical topics include colloidal dynamics, dispersion and mixing, fluidation, heterogeneous catalysis, polymer reaction engineering, stochastic processes, and statistical mechanics.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CHME 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
CHME 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
CHME 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 16
CISH or CSCI 6960 - Topics in Computer and Information Sciences: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CIVL 1100 - Introduction to Civil and Environmental Engineering: Deals with the practice of Civil and Environmental Engineering.  Not a highly analytical course, as the course is primarily intended for first year students. Some topics: history of Civil Eng.; present practice; typical employers; typical projects; design philosophy; professional topics including organizations, registrations, ethics. Discuss case histories, bring in outside speakers. Students attend CE Capstone presentations.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1
CIVL 1200 - Engineering Graphics for Civil Engineers: An introduction to the elements of computer aided design for Civil and Environmental Engineers using AutoCAD Civil 3D. Students will be introduced to basic AutoCAD drafting techniques as well as learn the key features of Civil 3D that aid site development design and analysis. Topics covered will include general AutoCAD techniques, existing conditions development and analysis using field collected survey data and GIS information, pipe network design, grading design, and roadway corridor layout.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite for ENGR 2050 Intro to Engineering Design.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
CIVL 2030 - Introduction to Transportation Engineering: Introduction to basic concepts in transportation engineering including planning, design, and operations. Introduces the challenges and issues in modeling transportation problems. Studies of various concepts related to the design of highway facilities, level of service, and demand for transportation services. Concepts related to signal optimization. Policy implications. Basics of transportation planning.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CIVL 2040 - Professional Practice: Contract essentials; types of contracts for construction and for engineering services. Bidding procedure, surety bonds, insurance, litigation. Standard contract documents, the compilation of specifications. Engineering ethical principles and codes.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 2630 - Introduction to Geotechnical Engineering: The application of the basic laws and phenomena of science to particulate matter, specifically soils. Basic physical and mechanical structural characteristics of soil. Equilibrium and movement of water. Flow through porous media. Effective stress. Stress-strain-time relations. Basic laboratory work as related to practice.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2530.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
CIVL 2670 - Introduction to Structural Engineering: Introduction to the elastic behavior of structural components. Analysis of statically determinate systems. Deflection calculations by virtual work and elastic load methods. Analysis of simple statically indeterminate structures. Influence lines. Interaction of structural components. Typical structural engineering loads.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2530 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CIVL 2940 - Readings in Civil Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CIVL 4010 - Foundation Engineering: Subsurface investigation. The application of the principles of soil mechanics to the design of footings, retaining walls, pile foundations, bulkheads, cofferdams, bridge piers and abutments, and underpinnings.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2530 and CIVL 2630 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4020 - Bedford Seminar: The seminar will be interdisciplinary with students from both architecture and civil engineering departments. The content of the lectures bears direct relation to practical experience and is considered to be supplementary to the other courses in the respective engineering and architecture schools. Specific types of structures will be examined with the help of suitable existing project examples clarifying and critically analyzing the basic engineering principles behind them. Students will be exposed to the collaborative methods inherent within the architect/engineer relationship.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: CIVL 4450 Conceptual Structural Systems.  When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4070 - Steel Design: Analysis and design of metal structures. Structural materials and loads. Design of beams, columns, bolted and welded connections. Composite construction.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2670.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4080 - Concrete Design: Analysis and design of reinforced concrete structures using ultimate strength methods. Design of beams, columns, slabs, and footings. Development and anchorage of reinforcing bars.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2670.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4140 - Geoenvironmental Engineering: The application of geotechnical engineering to the environmental area. Deals with waste disposal, waste containment systems, waste stabilization, and landfills. Emphasis on design of such facilities. Includes related topics necessary for design, e.g., geosynthetics, groundwater, contaminant transport, and slurry walls. Some field trips are possible. (Students cannot receive credit for both this course and CIVL 6550.)When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4150 - Experimental Soil Mechanics: Second course in geotechnical engineering, emphasizing experimental aspects of soil behavior. Laboratory experiments to measure the following soil properties: consolidation, compressibility, shear strength, permeability, various moduli, and bearing capacity. Theory, practical applications of theory, and laboratory.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2630 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4240 - Introduction to Finite Elements: An introductory course in use of the Finite Element Method (FEM) to solve one-and two-dimensional problems in fluid mechanics, heat transfer, and elasticity. The methods are developed using weighted residuals. Algorithms for the construction and solution of the governing equations are also covered. Students will be exposed to the use of commercial finite element software.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2250 or ENGR 2530 or ECSE 4160 and senior standing.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 4240. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 4240.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4270 - Construction Management: Application of engineering principles to planning construction operations. Network scheduling (CPM, PERT), resource allocation. Cost engineering and control.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: senior standing.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4280 - Design for Constructability: Design of systems to consider foundations, structures, and constructability; foundation alternatives; structural design to simplify erection; prefabrication, modulation of structures; material handling on a construction site; crane selection and placement; temporary works.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CIVL 4070 (Steel Design) or CIVL 4080 (Concrete Design) or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4440 - Matrix Structural Analysis: Principles of displacement-based structural analysis; development of element and structure stiffness matrices; direct stiffness method for matrix structural analysis of trusses, beams, and frames; computer analysis of structures; introduction to finite element method.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2670.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4450 - Conceptual Structural Systems: This course covers concepts of structural systems. The course is aimed at understanding behavior of different structural systems and how they respond to various loading conditions. The concept of load transfer, shaping, and form finding is of particular interest. This concept is reinforced through analytical, digital, and physical modeling intended to foster intuitive thinking. The course includes the following: approximate analyses of statically indeterminate beams, rigid frames, and vierendeel frames; cable suspended structures, arch supported structures; masonry structures, space frame, and folded plate structures; spherical, cylindrical, and hyperbolic shells; net and tent structures; air-supported and air-inflated structures, and hybrid structural systems. The course includes guest lectures, project, computer simulation, and testing physical models.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2670. Corequisite:  CIVL 4020.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4570 - Analytical Methods in Civil Engineering Systems: This course is an applications-oriented course covering basic analytical tools for modeling and optimization of large-scale civil engineering systems. Application domains in civil engineering that will be discussed include: scheduling in large systems, pipeline systems, transportation and logistics planning,  as well as other civil engineering systems. An overview of different optimization techniques, with a particular focus on network flow problems and introductory stochastic analysis will be provided. Software to solve these problems will be used throughout the class. <span style="font-family:arial;font-size:10pt;"> Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CIVL 2030, ENGR 2600, and ENGR 4760.
CIVL 4620 - Mass Transit Systems: The basic concepts of planning, design, and operation of urban mass transit systems. Topics include travel demand, network configurations, communication and control systems, power systems, vehicle technology, guideway and vehicle support and guidance technology, routing and scheduling, operating practice, marketing and financing of transit service, interface design, and implementation. These topics are discussed with relation to bus transit systems, guided transit systems, and several new systems. Several case studies examined.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2030.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4640 - Transportation System Planning: Introduction to the analysis and planning of transportation systems. Study of the basic interaction between transportation supply and demand. Role of transportation systems analysis in the social, environmental, and policy making. Trip generation. Trip distribution. Mode split. Traffic Assignment. Computer applications (meets with CIVL 6250 Transportation System Planning). Students cannot obtain credit for this course and CIVL 6250.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2030.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4660 - Traffic Engineering: Basic characteristics of traffic flow, including driver, vehicle, volume, speed, delay, capacity, and accidents; traffic regulation and control, signs, markings, signals, and signal systems; basic traffic flow theory; study methods and analysis procedures to solve traffic engineering and control problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2030.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4670 - Highway Engineering: Principles of geometric design of highways, intersections, interchanges, and terminals. Practical issues of vertical and horizontal curvature, highway evaluation, driver and vehicle dynamics, and traffic safety are also addressed. Computer-aided design and modeling.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2030.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4920 - Civil Engineering Capstone Design: Open-ended design project in which students work in teams. Oral presentations and written reports cover alternates considered, design assumptions, cost, safety, and feasibility. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: Senior status and CIVL 4070 and CIVL 4080, or CIVL 4010 and CIVL 4150, or CIVL 2030 and CIVL 4660 or CIVL 4640 or ENVE 2110, and either ENVE 4200, ENVE 4350, ENVE 4310 or ENVE 4340.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 4940 - Readings in Civil Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CIVL 4960 - Topics in Civil Engineering: Credit Hours: 3



CIVL 6170 - Mechanics of Solids: This course provides an introduction to the mechanics of solids from a continuum perspective.  Topics covered in this course include:  vector and tensor analysis, coordinate systems and calculus in curvilinear coordinate systems, kinematics (motion, deformation and strain), stress and momentum balance, energy principles and balance laws, linear isotropic and anisotropic elasticity, thermoelasticity, method of solutions for 2-D and 3-D linear elastic boundary value problems, applications to simple structures.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6170. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 6170.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6180 - Mechanics of Composite Materials: Micromechanics of elastic heterogeneous solids. Plasticity of composite materials. Thermoelastic and thermoplastic behavior. Mechanics of distributed damage. Mechanical behavior.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: One graduate course in mechanics of solids.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6180. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 6180.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6190 - Advanced Transportation Models: This graduate level course will introduce two types of advanced models related to travel demand forecasting: the land use models and the activity-based models. This project-based course will allow students to obtain sound knowledge of advanced modeling techniques, and to have some preliminary experience with building, estimating, and applying advanced transportation models.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6200 - Plates and Shells: Preliminaries on linear, three-dimensional elasticity theory. Reduction of the elasticity theory to theories of plates and shells. Anisotropy. Nonlinear theories. Applications.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6200. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 6200.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6210 - Structural Stability: Concepts of stability pertaining to structural and mechanical systems. Static and dynamic theories of stability. Configurations include bars, plates, shells, and structural complexes.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6210. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 6210.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6220 - Critical Issues in Transportation: To provide the students with a broad understanding of cutting edge methodologies in transportation modeling and economics not thoroughly covered in other courses and emerging issues pertaining to transportation research and practice.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2030 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6230 - Transportation Economics: Review of economic concepts and their application to transportation. Economic basis of transportation demand. Estimation of aggregate and disaggregate demand functions. Value of time. Supply functions. Cost functions, production functions. Transportation externalities. Valuation techniques. Cost/benefit analysis and multi-criteria approaches.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CIVL 2030 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6240 - Intelligent Transportation Systems: The course discusses Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) technologies and their application areas. ITS technologies. ITS Architecture. ITS applications. A number of outside speakers will complement the lectures. The students are expected to give at least two technical presentations and write a final paper on an ITS topic of their choosing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2030 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6250 - Transportation Systems Planning: ﻿﻿The analysis and planning of transportation systems. Study of the basic interaction between transportation supply and demand. Role of transportation systems analysis in social, environmental, and policy making. Trip generation. Trip distribution. Mode split. Traffic Assignment. Computer applications. Students cannot obtain credit for this course and CIVL 4640. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2030 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6260 - Transportation Network Analysis: Fundamentals of transportation network analysis, including graph representations of transportation networks, shortest path search algorithms, static traffic assignment and user equilibrium, and dynamic traffic assignment. Focus on how basic mathematical analysis tools such as linear and nonlinear programming can be used to analyze transportation network problems. The objective of this course is to introduce students to transportation network analysis fundamentals so that they are equipped with basic skills to analyze related problems in this area.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CIVL 2030; MATH 2400.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6270 - Traffic Control and Simulation: Topics on traffic control systems such as signals and ramp metering; sensor-aided and data-oriented traffic modeling; fundamentals and applications of microscopic traffic simulation. State of the art signal design and traffic simulation tools will be used throughout the class.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2030, CIVL 4660 or their equivalents.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6280 - Dynamic Traffic Models: The fundamentals of dynamic equilibrium with applications to planning and real-time operations in transportation systems. A network optimization approach to dynamic models including time dependent shortest path algorithms, analytical and simulation models for dynamic traffic assignment. Applications of these approaches to network wide real-time control. Emphasis on implementation of algorithms using programming languages.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 6260.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6290 - Freight Transportation Systems: Background and socio-economic aspects of freight transportation. Freight policy and planning objectives. Distribution system and participating agents. Behavior of freight agents. Short-medium term operational improvements: Land use and traffic related. Short-medium term operational improvements: System level strategies. System perspective of freight activity. Strategic freight transportation planning and freight demand modeling.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CIVL 6250.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered yearsCredit Hours: 3
CIVL 6300 - Transportation Statistical Modeling: This graduate level course will introduce a number of econometric models to analyze transportation data, ranging from count of crash occurrence to household trip frequency. Students will learn to specify, estimate, and interpret models to study various transportation issues.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6310 - Advanced Concrete Structures: Advanced analysis and design of reinforced concrete structures. Design of deep beams, slender columns, two-way floor systems. Deflection computations. Design for torsion. Prestressed concrete fundamentals.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 4080 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6320 - Advanced Steel Design: Advanced analysis and design of complex metal structures. Flexible, semi-rigid, and rigid connections. Plate girders, torsional design. Effects of semi-rigid connections on structural stability.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 4070 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6340 - Bedford Design Studio: <span style="color:#000000;">Open-ended design project in which students work in teams of four (two engineers and two architects) to replicate the Architecture/Structural Engineering integrated design of buildings. Oral presentations and written reports and studio critics cover alternatives considered, design assumptions, and cost estimates. This is a communication-intensive course.
CIVL 6350 - Masonry Design: To develop a general familiarity with the structural design of masonry elements and structures. This includes exposure to the historical development of design specifications as well as specific design procedures unique to this material.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CIVL 4070 (Steel Design) or CIVL 4080 (Concrete Design) or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6360 - Timber Design: To develop a general familiarity with the structural design of wood elements and structures. This includes exposure to the historical development of design specifications as well as specific design procedures unique to this material.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CIVL 4070 (Steel Design) or CIVL 4080 (Concrete Design) or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6380 - Advanced Concrete MechanicsMechanics of concrete failure under uniaxial and multiaxial stress states. Strain-softening behavior and damage localization in tension and compression. Nonlinear strain-hardening behavior under triaxial compression. Tensile fracture and size-effect. Constitutive modeling of concrete mechanical behavior. Cohesive crack model. Plasticity models, damage models, microplane models, and discrete models.
CIVL 6390 - Wind Engineering: This course will develop understanding and integrate skills across the fields of fluid mechanics, meteorology, climatology, bluff-body aerodynamics, structural dynamics, code provisions for design, wind tunnel testing, and damage documentation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENVE 4310.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6440 - Nonlinear Structural Analysis: Matrix formulation of nonlinear structural analysis problems; analysis of structures with geometric and material nonlinearities; elastic and inelastic buckling; plastic analysis of beams and frames; computer analysis of nonlinear structure.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prequisite:  CIVL 4440 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6450 - Structural Dynamics: Analysis of elastic and inelastic single and multiple degree-of-freedom structural systems under time-dependent loads including harmonic, impulse, earthquake, and other general dynamic loads. Development of equations of motion. Analytical and numerical evaluation of free and forced vibration response. Identification of dynamic system properties. Modal analysis. Vibration isolation and force transmissibility. Dynamic measurement sensors. Shock loading spectrum. Frequency-domain analysis.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2670.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6460 - Advanced Structural Dynamics: Stochastic response of lumped parameter and continuous systems to random excitation, wave propagation, power spectral densities, covariance and cross covariance functions, transfer functions, application of procedure to wind and earthquake engineering. Review of current literature.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 6450.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6480 - Designing with Geosynthetics: Civil Engineering applications of geosynthetics including geotextiles, geogrids, geonets, geomembranes, geosynthetic clay liners, geopipe, and geocomposites. Designing by function, including separation, reinforcement, filtration, drainage, liquid barrier, and combined functions. Applications in the areas of landfills, groundwater drains, geotextile reinforced walls and slopes, roadways, and other civil engineered type structures.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2630 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6490 - Earthquake Engineering: Seismology concepts including plate tectonics, fault mechanisms, quantification of earthquake size, and wave propagation. Dynamic sensors for earthquake ground motion measurement. Estimation of ground motion parameters using attenuation relationships. Linear and nonlinear dynamic analyses for evaluation of the seismic response of structures. Code-based approach to the seismic analysis and design of structural systems. Seismic design considerations for various construction materials. Base isolation and energy dissipation systems for seismic protection of structures.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 6450.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6510 - Advanced Soil Mechanics: An intensive study of the fundamentals of soil mechanics at the graduate level. Transmission of stresses between particles. Soils in which the pore water is either stationary or flowing under steady conditions. Soils in which pore pressures are influenced by applied loads, and hence the pore water is flowing under transient conditions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 4150.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6520 - Advanced Foundations and Earth Structures: The applications of the principles of soil mechanics to the design of foundations, at the graduate level. Subsurface investigation. Design of footings, retaining walls, pile foundations, flexible retaining structures, anchor tie-backs, bridge piers, abutments, embankments, and natural slopes. Slope stability analysis and landslide prevention. Earthquake effects. Case studies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CIVL 4010, CIVL 4150.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6530 - Seepage, Drainage, and Groundwater: Introduction to groundwater hydrology, well hydraulics, permeability, seepage, flow nets, filter criteria, dewatering, slope stabilization, practical applications.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 2630 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6540 - Dynamics of Soil and Soil-Foundation Systems: Basics of dynamic response of soil and soil-foundation systems, including applications to earthquake engineering and machine foundations. Systems studies include shallow and deep foundations, buried structures, earth structures, slopes, and earthquake site response.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 6450.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6550 - Advanced Geoenvironmental Engineering: An intensive study of the application of geotechnical engineering to the environmental area. Deals with waste disposal, waste containment systems, waste stabilization, and landfills. Emphasis on design of such facilities. Includes related topics necessary for design, e.g., geosynthetics, groundwater, contaminant transport, and slurry walls. Some field trips are possible. This course meets concurrently with CIVL 4140. CIVL 6550 students are required to do a term paper and/or project, read additional professional papers and publications, and do additional laboratory experiments. (Students cannot receive credit for both this course and CIVL 4140.)When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6660 - Fundamentals of Finite Elements: Graduate-level course on the fundamental concepts and technologies underlying finite element methods for the numerical solution of continuum problems. The course emphasizes the construction of integral weak forms for elliptic partial differential equations and the construction of the elemental level matrices using multi-dimensional shape functions, element level mappings, and numerical integration. The basic convergence properties of the finite element method will be given. This course serves as preparation for students working on finite element methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: differential equations.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6660. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and MANE 6660.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6670 - Nonlinear Finite Element Methods: The formulations and solution strategies for finite element analysis of nonlinear problems are developed. Topics include the sources of nonlinear behavior (geometric, constitutive, boundary condition), derivation of the governing discrete equations for nonlinear systems such as large displacement, nonlinear elasticity, rate independent and dependent plasticity and other nonlinear constitutive laws, solution strategies for nonlinear problems (e.g., incrementation, iteration), and computational procedures for large systems of nonlinear algebraic equations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 6660 or MANE 6660.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6670. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 6670.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6680 - Finite Element Programming: Examines the implementation of finite element methods. Consideration is first given to the techniques used in classic finite element programs. Attention then focuses on development of a general geometry-based code which effectively supports higher order adaptive technique. Technical areas covered include: effective construction of element matrices for p-version finite elements, ordering of unknowns, automatic mesh generation, adaptive mesh improvement, program and database structures. Implementation of automated adaptive techniques on parallel computers is also covered.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CIVL 6660, MANE 6660, CSCI 6860, or MATH 6860.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6680. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 6680.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6690 - Advanced Finite Element Formulations: This course focuses on generalized weighted residual methods and multifield variational principles for constructing approximate solutions to sets of governing differential equations and associated boundary conditions. Topics include hybrid and mixed methods, boundary element formulations, p-version finite elements, global/local procedures, and penalty methods. Problem areas include solid mechanics (nearly incompressible solids, plates, and shells), fluid mechanics including compressible flows, and heat transfer.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 6660 or MANE 6660.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6690. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 6690.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6700 - Finite Element Methods in Structural Dynamics: Solutions to the free vibration and transient dynamic responses of two-and three-dimensional structures by the finite element method are considered. The governing finite element matrix equations are derived and numerical aspects of solving these time-dependent equations considered. Topics include the formulation of the eigenvalue problem, algorithms for eigenvalue extraction, time integration methods including stability and accuracy analysis, and finite elements in time. Modal analysis and direct time integration techniques are compared for a variety of two-and three-dimensional problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 6660 or MANE 6660.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6700. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MANE 6700.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6780 - Numerical Modeling of Failure Processes in Materials: State-of-the-art in computational modeling of failure processes in materials. Topics include numerical modeling of discrete defects, distributed damage, and multiscale computational techniques including multiple scale perturbation techniques, boundary layer techniques, and various global-local approaches.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CIVL 6660 or MANE 6660.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6780. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and MANE 6780.Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6900 - Civil and Environmental Engineering Graduate Seminar: Civil and environmental engineering graduate students present seminars about their research to an audience composed of students and faculty, and participate in discussions about the research of others. The course consists of one-hour weekly meetings. The faculty member in charge of the course helps the students develop their presentation and communication skills. M.S. and Ph.D. students are required to take this course once before completion of their terminal degree. This course is not required for ME students not doing a thesis or project.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1
CIVL 6910 - Colloquium Series: Seminars by distinguished guest speakers. All undergraduates and graduates are strongly encouraged to attend as many lectures as possible.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 0
CIVL 6940 - Readings in Civil Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CIVL 6960 - Topics in Civil Engineering: Credit Hours: 3
CIVL 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
CIVL 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the Master’s Project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
CIVL 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
CIVL 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
COGS 2120 - Introduction to Cognitive Science: This course is an introduction to the new and quickly growing field of cognitive science. Cognitive Science is a highly interdisciplinary field of study of mind at the intersection of philosophy, psychology, computer science, neuroscience, linguistics, and anthropology. This is a communication-intensive course.
COGS 2520 - Introduction to Game Design: This course looks at the mathematics of game theory from a psychological perspective and serves as a primer in video game design. The psychology of players and designers are discussed, as well as the cognitive processes that people use when solving game-related puzzles. Additional topics include logic, human frailty, role playing, artificial intelligence, kinesics, theater, and human-computer interaction.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 2540 - Introduction to Game ProgrammingThis hands-on class introduces many fundamental concepts in game development. Students will learn to program multiple video games. Topics include render loops, rigid body dynamics, interfaces, event and messaging systems, and co-routines.
COGS 4210 - Cognitive Modeling: This is an undergraduate level course that introduces the student to computational cognitive modeling. Cognitive modeling is the simulation of human cognitive, perceptual and motor processes based on a cognitive architecture. The benefit of cognitive modeling is that it facilitates the testing of ideas about human processes through comparison of model data with empirical data. This course covers ACT-R, a symbolic architecture and LEABRA, a neural-level architecture.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  COGS 4410 or permission of instructor. When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as COGS 6210.  Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and COGS 6210.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 4320 - Game Mechanics: This is an iterative game prototyping class. The focus is on designing and tuning games from a rules-based perspective. Topics include cooperation and competition, risk and reward, probability, and game balance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COGS 2520.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 4330 - Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience: This survey course is intended as an introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience. The topics covered will focus on exploring the neural underpinnings for cognitive processes, such as sensation, language, attention, motor control, executive functions, social communication, emotions, consciousness, and learning/memory. Basic aspects of nervous system function and neuroanatomy, brain development/evolution, structural and functional imaging techniques, and other research methods used in Cognitive Neuroscience will be discussed.
COGS 4360 - Behavioral Neuroscience: This course is an introduction to the role of physiological mechanisms in behavioral processes. There will be detailed examination and discussion of the involvement of biological systems in feeding and drinking, sexual behavior, sleep and arousal, learning and memory, psychopathology and psychopharmacology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PSYC 1200, or PSYC/PHIL 2120, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with PSYC 4320; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 4410 - Programming for Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence: This course is an undergraduate course that teaches Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence concepts by enabling the student to develop and understand computer programs that implement them. It covers data collection and analysis, task environments, natural language, cognitive architectures, and learning. Some previous programming experience is very beneficial but not required.
COGS 4420 - Game AI: This course introduces students to basic concepts and methods of artificial intelligence and their applications in computer games. The topics include decision making, movement, path finding, and AI for human-like characters. This course will take the form of a combination of lectures, presentations by students, class discussions, and independent study.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 4520 - Game Development I: This class is a practical primer for anyone interested in a career in the rapidly evolving industry of video gaming. It is an intense, team-based, project-based course in which students will closely follow the actual game development cycle, with each team producing a complete PC game.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COGS 2520 or CSCI 2300.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ARTS 4520 and CSCI 4520; students cannot obtain credit for more than one course.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 4540 - Game Development II: This course follows Game Development I. Students work in interdisciplinary teams to create one large-scale 3D game, working from concept to public release. Projects may include games, educational games, serious games and simulations, and interactive artworks, and will focus on creative design, technical execution, and use of game design principles. The course builds on skills and knowledge in previous courses in the GSAS core, including game design, game mechanics, game programming, art, and narrative.
COGS 4550 - Game Architecture: This is a class on the composition of game engines, the substrate between hardware and scripting. Topics include splines, collision detection, event management, shader programming, scene graph manipulations, and rigid body dynamics. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 4600 - Cognition and the Brain: Perception and thought are considered in terms of processes represented in the brain. The localization and lateralization of function are examined, drawing upon research on the behavioral effects of brain damage as well as brain-imaging studies and other approaches. Examples of topics include object recognition, memory, language, emotion, spatial ability, and motor processes.  Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PSYC 1200, or COGS/PSYC 4330, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with PSYC 4600; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 4610 - Stress on the Brain: This seminar course is a detailed examination of the mind-brain relationship, through study of the stress response. Stress is simply defined as any challenge to an individuals homeostasis or balance. This course will explore the neurobiological underpinnings of the stress response, with particular focus on how stressors can alter perception, affective and cognitive processing in the individual, which can in turn feedback to alter the general health of the individual (body and mind/brain).
COGS 4620 - Cognitive Engineering: Covers cognitive theory from an applied perspective to understand and predict the interactions among human cognition, artifact (i.e., tools), and task. Cognitive task analysis techniques will be taught and used throughout the course, as will techniques for collecting and analyzing fine-grained behavioral data. Topics covered may include visual search and visual attention, cognitive skill and its acquisition, hard and soft constraints on interactive behavior, human error, soft constraints on judgment and decision-making, and experts and expertise.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  PSYC/PHIL 2120 or PSYC 4310 or PSYC 4370 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with PSYC 4620.  Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 4640 - Intelligent Virtual Agents: This course introduces various computational approaches for creating intelligent conversational agents. This course will take the form of a combination of lectures, presentations by students, class discussions, and independent study.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CSCI 1200 and CSCI 2300.When Offered: Annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 4940 - Readings in Cognitive Science: An individually arranged independent study course under the supervision of a member of the Cognitive Science Department. The topic is selected by consultation between student and faculty member.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
COGS 4960 - Topics in Cognitive Science: An advanced course concerned with selected topics in cognitive science.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
COGS 4990 - Undergraduate Thesis: Students conduct original scholarly projects: original research, theoretical or analytical reviews of the literature, or computer simulations. Students prepare written reports relating to this project, under the supervision of a faculty member. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of a supervising faculty member (completion of the thesis/project/dissertation registration form).When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 3-6
COGS 6100 - Seminar in Cognitive Engineering: Integrated cognitive systems comprise human cognitive, perception, and motor subsystems in coordinated action with interactive devices. Examples may be as simple as a human using a VCR or as complex as the behavior exhibited by Air Force pilots. This course will introduce students to the cognitive theory behind integrated cognitive systems, the techniques for collecting and analyzing data such as eye movements and action protocols, as well as the software tools available for the representation of interactive behavior.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: admission to the doctoral program.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 6200 - Cognition: This course covers reasoning, decision making, and behavioral game theory, which are major domains in human higher order cognition. Each topic begins with normative theories and continues through formal and mathematical models, and the introduction of empirical studies. The course emphasizes integrations of competing approaches within a domain, integration between reasoning and decision making, and integration between individual decision making and game-theoretic interactions. Each year, the course has a theme. The theme for this year is quantum cognition, which applies quantum theory in cognitive modeling. This course is designed as self-contained, and has no prerequisites. A middle term presentation and a final term paper are required for each student. Graduate students only.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 6210 - Cognitive Modeling I: This is a graduate level course that introduces the student to computational cognitive modeling. Cognitive modeling is the simulation of human cognitive, perceptual, and motor processes based on a cognitive architecture. The benefit of cognitive modeling is that it facilitates the testing of ideas about human processes through comparison of model data with empirical data. This course covers ACT-R, a symbolic architecture and LEABRA, a neural-level architecture.<span style="font-size:10pt"> When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as COGS 4210.  Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and COGS 4210.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 6220 - Cognitive Modeling II: This is a graduate level course that extends the objectives of Cognitive Modeling I to additional cognitive architectures. The first part of the course is a survey of cognitive modeling paradigms. The second part will be a more in depth coverage of two or three architectures and will be done by teams of students. Each team will study one architecture including the development of a model.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as COGS 4220.  Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and COGS 4220.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 6240 - Logic and Artificial Intelligence: This course is about the connection between logic and artificial intelligence (AI). It may be partitioned into three general sections: 1) the straightforward application of firstorder logic (FOL) in AI; 2) the broadening of FOL to enable a robot to reason in a commonsense way (nonmonotonic reasoning, induction, etc.) and to formalize a robot agent’s belief and knowledge system (modal logics, etc.); and 3) using a logical approach to the Frame Problem and to building a planner.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 6410 - Programming for Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence: This course is a graduate course that teaches Cognitive Science and Artificial Intelligence concepts by enabling the student to develop and understand computer programs that implement them. It covers data collection and analysis, task environments, natural language, cognitive architectures, and learning. Some previous programming experience is very beneficial but not required.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as COGS 4410.  Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and COGS 4410.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 6420 - Perception and Action: This course is a graduate level introduction to the topic of perception and action, and will focus on the significance of perception, motor control, and perceptual-motor learning as they relate to the performance of routine and skilled tasks. It will explore perception and action from information processing, computational, dynamical systems, and ecological perspectives, review current empirical and computational research, and consider some applications, including training, rehabilitation, human-machine interaction, and robotics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate status or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 6570 - Advanced Behavioral Statistics: An accelerated course covering important behavioral statistical concepts including probability, sampling distributions, hypothesis resting, ANOVA, and multiple regression. Course requires usage of statistical software package and is taught using the general linear model framework.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate status and one course in undergraduate statistics.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 6640 - Intelligent Virtual Agent: This course introduces various computational approaches for creating intelligent conversational agents. This course will take the form of a combination of lectures, presentations by students, class discussions, and independent study.
COGS 6690 - Seminar in Research Design: An in-depth study of quasi-experimental and experimental design of behavioral research. Topics include test construction and development, factor analysis, meta-analysis, repeated measures, and MANOVA.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COGS 6570 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COGS 6940 - Readings in Cognitive Science: An individually arranged independent study course under the supervision of a member of the Cognitive Science Department. The topic is selected by consultation between student and faculty member.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate status and permission of supervising faculty member.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4 credits
COGS 6960 - Topics in Cognitive Science: An advanced course concerned with selected topics in cognitive science.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
COGS 6960 - Topics in Cognitive Science: An advanced course concerned with selected topics in cognitive science.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4 credits
COGS 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will be listed as S.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 9 credits
COGS 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 9 credits
COGS 9990 - Doctoral Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the  dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral  committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education, it will be  archived in a standard format in the library.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: Variable
COMM 1510 - Communication Theory and Practice: This course introduces students to basic topics in communication theory and research. It includes topics in interpersonal, group, organizational, mediated, and mass communication. Students will study and apply theories to real world situations and events and explore the social and cultural impact of new media technology. This is a communication intensive course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 1600 - History and Culture of Games: This course surveys 5000 years of game history, from ancient Sumeria to the latest next-generation consoles and MMOGs. In parallel with this historical tour, several major theories will be examined about the nature of play and the nature of games. Along the way we will also look at how games and play influence the cultures they are found in, and how culture in turn influences how people structure their leisure time will also be considered. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: With STSH/STSS 1600. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and either STSH/STSS 1600.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 2210 - Web and Database Programming: This course introduces the fundamentals for creating dynamic Web page content generated using relational databases. This course is structured around Microsoft Visual Studio.NET and modern object-oriented programming languages like C#. Fundamental technologies like ADO.NET database connectivity, ASP.NET active page technology, XML, SOAP, and Web Services are examined. Students will construct actual non-trivial working Web sites that employ databases from which dynamic content is generated.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 2390 - Formations of Race: This course explores the historical development and social production of race as an essentialized aspect of human difference, followed by contemporary constructions of race, racial orders, and lived racial experience in the U.S. and other countries. Topics include: race, biology, and anthropology; racial classification; the critical concept of whiteness; the language of new racism; the post-racial paradigm; and representations of race and ethnicity in entertainment media past and present.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 2410 - Perspectives on Photography: This course helps students understand the meaning and emotional complexity of visual images in our culture. Students examine photographic imagery through three perspectives. The first—formal—addresses the design components of the image, such as vantage point and contrast. The second—psychodynamic—concerns the emotional dynamics of viewing. The third—social political— explores photographs as instruments for preserving or challenging cultural values. No technical knowledge of photography is needed.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 2440 - Documentary Film: Does documentary film depict reality, or is it just another form of storytelling? This course takes a broad, historical look at documentary media, exposing students to a wide range of works that in some sense stand on claims to truth. Students are invited to develop a critical stance toward documentary modes of social representation, through viewing and analyzing colonial photography and cinema, ethnographic, propaganda, cinema verite, experimental, and even “fake documentaries. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 2520 - Introduction to Game Storytelling: This course is designed to provide an overview of the art of effective story development. Students will come away with a heightened awareness of the structures and principles that master storytellers apply to their craft in games and other popular media. It is intended for all GSAS majors and other interested students, as well as the prerequisite for the GSAS concentration in Writing.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 2610 - Introduction to Visual Communication: This course is an introduction to basic principles of visual communication and an exploration of the graphic design process. The study approach is through laboratory work utilizing software applications currently used in the field. Topics include type and image; logo design and application; foundation statement creation; and print production methods.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 2620 - Color Theory: Color — the most relative of all visual attributes — is explored in this studio course through a series of exercises and graphic design problems. Investigations will include: recollection (i.e. visual memory), reading and contexture, relativity and subjectivity, color and light, color and communication, and cultural color. An emphasis on the work and theories of Joseph Albers will be examined.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2610.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 2940 - Communication Studies: Readings and projects adapted to the needs of individual students.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 2960 - Topics in Communication: Experimental courses tried out in one or two terms.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4180 - Studio Design in Human-Computer Interaction: In this course, students work on collaborative projects to design human-computer interactions (HCIs) aimed at transforming peoples everyday practices. Students work with activity analysis, object-oriented modeling, and UI prototyping. Additional assignments required for students at the 6000 level.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 4420, COMM 4710, or COMM 4770.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6810; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4210 - Designing Interactive Characters for Digital Games: This course takes a multi-disciplinary approach to teaching the design of interactive characters for games. Students learn and apply principles from psychology, traditional media, and best practices from the games industry to the crafting of engaging characters. Students develop critical analysis and design skills, as well as team-based project skills. The course includes industry guest speakers, and culminates with the creation of concept prototypes.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  COGS 2520 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4230 - Psychological and Social Effects of Games: This course will address issues related to the psychological and social effects of games. How video games can change personal experience and catalyze social change will be discussed from a broad, critical perspective. The course will draw upon comparative historical, psychological, and sociological domains of knowledge to evaluate existing game influences and consider future possibilities for impact. This course is communication-intensive. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  Any HASS undergraduate course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4240 - Writing for Games I: This is the second course in the central track of the Writing concentration for GSAS students. In this project-intensive course, students will learn and practice basic, in-the-trenches writing and narrative development for games, including story outlines, cutscenes, scripted dialogue, systemic dialogue and mission writing and design, across multiple game types and narrative genres.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: COMM 2520 ( Introduction to Game Storytelling), WRIT 2330 (Creative Writing: The Short Story), or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4250 - Writing for Games II: This is the third course in the central track of the Writing concentration for GSAS students. In this course, students gain exposure to elements of the bigger creative picture, including intellectual property (IP) development, world-building, and original character design. Students also continue to refine their competency in game writing essentials while exploring complex game narrative challenges such as branching, open-world, and other non-linear structures.Prerequisites/Corequisites: COMM 4240.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4300 - Communication Internship: This course is designed for COMM, EMAC, and GSAS majors who wish to incorporate field experience in their educational programs. Students work with local business, industrial, civic, or educational organizations in positions where they can observe communication processes and apply written, interpersonal, and public communication skills to the solution of real problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: Undergraduate major in COMM, EMAC, or GSAS with at least 16 credit hours completed in the major.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6300.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4310 - Sustainable Graphic Design: This course is designed to introduce students to ideas and practices of sustainability in visual communications. Sustainable graphic design is the consideration of environmental, cultural, and physical impacts of graphic design products throughout their lifecycle. Designers engaged in sustainable practice use techniques, processes and materials to reduce the detrimental environmental, social, and economic impacts of their designs. They raise awareness and act as exemplars of sustainable practice for their clients, their peers, and their community.Prerequisites/Corequisites: COMM 2610 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4320 - Visual Poetic and Narrative: This studio course explored new directions in art and design that include visual poetry (visual expression in which they shape an arrangement of text, images, symbols convey the message) and interactive narrative. Visual poetics and narrative appear in advertisement, music videos, and other forms of communication. Students will experiment with these forms of communication and learn how these concepts apply in artistic and commerical contexts. The class format includes lectures, discussions, and studio work.Prerequisites/Corequisites: One of the following courses: ARTS 1020, COMM 1510, COMM 4460, COMM 4570, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term, even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4340 - Creative Seminar I: This course is for senior for EMAC and EART majors and is the core creative forum for the development and presentation of the senior thesis. The course is the first part of a two-semester study provided in two seminar courses. The focus of the course is to develop a proposal for a written thesis and a creative project that students will execute in the second seminar and exhibit in an exhibition.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Senior EMAC and EART majors only.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4



COMM 4350 - Creative Seminar II: This course is for senior EMAC and EART majors. The goal of the Creative Seminar II is to develop and formulate ideas fromCreative Seminar I into unique project for the artist/communicator that will demonstrate his/her independent ideas, research, wiriting, and design skills. Students will develop a written thesis, creative project (e.g., art, graphic design, interaction design, music, performance), prepare and present their project in a public exhibition, and design the publicity for the show.Prerequisites/Corequisites: COMM 4340 Creative seminar I, Senior EMAC and EART majors only.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4380 - Writing and Response: This course explores effective strategies for talking with others about oral presentations and written texts. Practice in consulting is grounded in theory and research in composition studies, reader-response, and tutoring. Students also study their own writing and reading processes through reflection and discussion. Those who complete the course with a grade of A- or A may apply to work as writing consultants in the Center for Communication Practices. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6380.  Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4400 - Cross-Cultural Design: Analysis and Application: What role does culture play in the design of images for communication? This course surveys perspectives from interdiscplinary discourse on what consititutes culture and its impact on meaning. Through readings on theory and criticism and analyses of media and research-generated data students learn what constitutes cultural difference and communicate that knowledge through a codex they write and design. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: any graphics course.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6400.  Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4420 - Foundations of HCI Usability: In this course, students will consider methods of gathering users requirements for product functions and information, ways to test products and information for usability and suitability, and procedures for incorporating the results learned through testing. Students will design and conduct usability tests on products, documents, and interfaces of interest.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: One HASS course.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6420; an additional assignment is required for COMM 6420. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4430 - Design for Global Society: How do images communicate meaning in global society? In this course, students use a social semiotic approach to interpret images that permeate cultural boundaries and impact the way people think and behave. Visual and verbal assignments enforce students ability to communicate how images either instill or enforce values and propagate ideas; a user-research project allows students to gather data to test their own image hypotheses. Special emphasis will be placed on developing students cross-cultural awareness of images.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6430; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4460 - Visual Design: Theory and Application: This course introduces students to the theoretical and practical use of graphics as a form of visual communication. Discussions include topics such as the psychology of visual perception, design theory, creative process, formatted text, and graphics. Students have an opportunity to put theory into practice using computer graphics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2610 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6560. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4470 - Information Design: This course examines methods of graphic representation of data. Course work requires graphing of information derived from researched databases. Visual presentations of historic data will be examined to determine the most efficient way to represent complex information without distorting the data within. Information designers clarify these displays and enrich the understanding of the modern world.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2610.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4520 - Information Architecture: This course examines theoretical and empirical issues in the field of Information Architecture, aiming to identify and utilize principles of information organization, collect and interpret empirical data on human information behavior, and develop and apply methods of information design all in the service of creating usable architectures of information. Focus is on developing experience for professional information architecture projects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: Any 4000-level COMM course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6620.  Students may not obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4540 - Visual Culture: Humansinhabit a culture of visual images.Images bombardthem on television, the Internet and in films; they surroundeveryone as architecture and fashion; they provide essential resource data in science, engineering, and business. This course will help students better understand how images communicate information, arouseemotions, and shapevalues. Students will primarily do readings in cultural history/theory with some viewing of films.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  One 2000-level HASS undergraduate course of permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4550 - Religion in the Media: How are religious fundamentalists using new media? Can religious conversion take place in a theme park? How are religious crossover films transforming political and popular cultural landscapes? This course maps the complex intersections of religion, culture, and media in the global transformations of religious traditions and explores, through a media frame, the return of religion within the secular consensus of modernity.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 1510 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4560 - Media and Popular Culture: A survey of the historical origins and cultural impact of several mass media, including television, film, radio, the Internet, and print media. The course aims to increase media literacy through analysis of specific media products as well as discussion of broad topics such as: advertising and commercialization; politics and censorship; gender, race, and social identity.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: Any COMM or LITR course, graduate standing, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4570 - Typography: This course teaches the principles of typesetting text effectively for hypothetical and real-worl communication. Students practice selecting typefaces, point-sizes, leading, line-length, color, justification, layouts, kerning and tracking for printed and digitized type. An RPI-sponsored, entrepreneurial component allows student teams to conduct typographic makeovers for real-world clients and individual students to explore typographics innovation for real-world audiences.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2610.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6570. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4580 - Advertising and Culture: An examination of the cultural impact of advertising in various media: TV, radio, print, and the Web. How does advertising inform human experience and identity? How has it shaped the culture? Who pays for it and why? Note: This is not a How-To course. The focus is critical analysis, not acquiring skills for producing advertising. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: Any COMM or LITR course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4610 - Rhetorical Analysis: A study of the persuasive use of language. Some basic theories of argument and style are explored as a means of improving the students ability to both analyze and create rhetorical discourse.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: WRIT 2110 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4620 - Language and Culture: This course examines the role that language plays in the production of social identities and cultural assumptions about the world. Course topics include: language and worldview; linguistic contact and change, language ideology and nationalism, religious language, politically correct speech, and the key role that language plays in structuring race, gender and class-based systems of social inequality. Guest lectures from the Languages faculty. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  COMM 1510 or Language Minor, or permission from instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4650 - Marketing Communication Design: This course examines communication design for marketing purposes. It evaluates the effectiveness of designs for information, persuasion, education, and administration. Discussions on denotation and connotation, gestalt theory, and semiotics aim to investigate how theory influences design and the political, social, and cultural dimensions of visual language. In a term-long project, students analyze how design from an entrepreneurial perspective can provide marketable solutions to communication problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: COMM 2610 and COMM 4570.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4660 - Visual Literacy: This course examines the notion of visual literacy—the ability to create effective visual layouts and analyze visual language for meaning. Through readings, discussions, and praxis exercises, students learn the lexicon of visual communication, how to critically evaluate a visual argument, and how to apply visual literacy theory to practice.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2610.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6660. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4670 - Advanced Typography: This advanced design studio course will explore individual approaches to typographic problems in both print and digital mediums. Projects will investigate typographic metaphor and illustration, designing typography for texts, and typography in motion. Emphasis will be on communication and typographic hierarchy while encouraging experimentation to create your own typographic voice. This is an advanced course and students will be expected to work independently.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 4570.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4680 - Electronic Portfolio Development: This course is designed to introduce students to the research, design, production, and distribution of an electronic portfolio of their own work. Through reading, class discussions, and class projects focusing on use of Photoshop, Illustrator, Dreamweaver and Flash, the course will explore concepts and techniques in the design and publication of networked digital material. The course will help students develop the ability to create and present a networked portfolio of their work.Prerequisites/Corequisites: COMM 2610 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4690 - Interface Design: Hypermedia Theory and Application: This course focuses on the design theory and research behind effective interface design for hypermedia programs (multimedia computer programs with interactive inks). These interactive programs are the standard form of communication on the WWW, CDs, and DVDs. Students apply theory and research by designing and developing an interactive multimedia program (for WWW or CD).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: 1) an introductory course in communication or another social science course or permission of the instructor; and 2) knowledge of authoring software for multimedia or Web development.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4710 - Communication Design for the WWW: In this course, students will examine the design and use of Web sites from initial gathering of user requirement, through design, development, and evaluation of a sites graphic and textual content and the assessment of customer satisfaction with the site.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 4420.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6750. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4730 - Graphic Design for Corporate Identity: This course examines historical and modern visual communication symbols in relationship to a companys overall industry and marketplace identity. The course focuses on design processes relative to the dissemination of consistent visual information. Projects will include an identity program for a fictitious company. The course study is structured as a design studio and is aimed at exploring unique methodologies of ever-changing media marketing tools. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 2610 and COMM 4570 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4770 - User-Experience Design: Designing an effective and enjoyable user experience involves more than just responding to specification requirements; it requires designers to understand user needs and expectations, the work that users do, and the environment in which they do their work. Students will learn and practice how to design a user experience and evaluate how effective they have been.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: COMM 4420 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6770; students taking COMM 6770 will be assigned an additional project. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4780 - Interactive Narrative: This course introduces students to narrative theory and interactive narratives in a variety of genres such as oral story-telling, literature, poetry, film, artists books, historical narrative, hypertext fiction, Net Art, social media narratives, and computer games. Students will have the opportunity to design and develop an original interactive narrative.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: COMM 2610, COMM 4460, LITR 2110, or WRIT 2330, or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6780. Students may not receive credit for both courses. Extra assignments are required in the graduate course.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4790 - Social Impact of Electronic Media: An exploration of the effects of electronic media such as the Internet, multimedia, computers, pop music, and television. The effects examined include changes in social and work relationships, time displacement, audience aggression, child socialization, education, and consumer behavior.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: any communication course or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4800 - Media and Memory: Most memories of the past are stories that circulate in the present through a variety of media. To probe the rhetorical mechanism of collective memory, this course combines exploration of several visual media with case studies that interpret the rhetorical potential of specific photographs, films, museums, and monuments.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: COMM 2610 or WRIT 1110.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6800. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4820 - Usability Testing: In this course, students will examine and practice several methods of formal usability testing. Classes will consist of classroom discussion of scenario-based testing methods and statistical analysis of data collected and of laboratory sessions in which students develop, conduct, record, and analyze usability tests.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 4420, COMM 4770, or ITWS 2210.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 6820. For COMM 6820, additional statistical analysis and a literature-based paper on a usability topic are required. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and COMM 6820.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4830 - Organizational Communication: Focuses on the central role of communication in organizations by exploring the way that communication is used in exercising authority, power, and control. Organizations with hierarchical and nontraditional structures are considered. The course also examines the role of communication in the social construction of organizational life.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: an introductory course in the social sciences or management or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4880 - Interactive Data Visualization: The course covers interactive, multimedia interface design (for Web sites and apps) for data visualization or other forms of interactive information design. Innovative designs that explore new directions in interactive data design are highlighted. Topics include multisensory information design using graphics, sound, touch, and large-scale data projection. Interface design topics include user-centered design, information architecture, rapid prototyping, cross-cultural design, and intellectual property. Students may choose the applications they want to design for the class project.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 1010 or CSCI 1100 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Summer term annually.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 4940 - Communication Studies: Readings and projects adapted to the needs of individual students.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
COMM 4960 - Topics in Communication: Experimental courses tried out in one or two terms.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 6260 - Rhetoric, Culture, and Communication Technology: This is a graduate seminar designed to introduce Ph.D. students to the history of rhetorical theory and its intersections with culture and technology.  The course will consider how theoretical reflection about language and other forms of communication is entwined with changes in technology of communication as well as cultural paradigm shifts.  Rather than trace a linear evolution of rhetorical theory from Classical Antiquity to the present, the course will focus on competing conceptualizations of rhetoric and rhetorical power in different historical periods.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6270 - Digital Rhetoric: A study of digital rhetoric with emphasis upon the uses of verbal and visual media in digital spaces such as email, discussion lists, Webs, blogs, wikis, and community technology centers. An examination of verbal and visual communication for the purposes of persuading, negotiating, contesting, and creating individual and community identities and an exploration of issues such as the relationship between privacy and panopticism, subjectivities and intersubjectivities, local and global communities, and online and offline communities.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6280 - Rhetorical Analysis: The application of rhetorical concepts in the analysis and appraisal of discourse. Students pursue projects under the direction of the instructor; weekly seminar meetings are devoted principally to discussions of ongoing projects.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6300 - Communication Internship: This course is designed for COMM, EMAC and GSAS majors who wish to incorporate field experience in their educational programs. Students work with local business, industrial, civic, or educational organizations in positions where they can observe communication processes and apply written, interpersonal, and public communication skills to the solution of real problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate status.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4300.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6320 - Visual Poetics and Narrative: This studio course explores new directions in art and design that include visual poetry (visual expression in which the shape and arrangement of text, images, and symbols covey the message) and interactive narrative. Visual poetics and narrative appear in advertisement, music videos, and other forms of communication. Students will experiment with these forms of communication and learn how these concepts apply in artistic and commercial contexts. The class format includes lectures, discussions, and studio work. When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6380 - Writing and Response: This course explores effective strategies for talking with others about oral presentations and written texts. Practice in consulting is grounded in theory and research in composition studies, reader-response, and tutoring. Students also study their own writing and reading processes through reflection and discussion. Those who complete the course with a grade of A- or A may apply to work as writing consultants in the Center for Communication Practices.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4380.  Students cannot take both courses for credit.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6390 - Semiotics and Fieldwork: This course examines how semiotics (i.e. the study of signs and sign systems) applies to the changing roles of images in todays media-immersed society. Students will analyze meaning making in multicultural social contexts, comparing both hyper-local and globally pervasive renditions of image-based media. A fieldwork assignment takes students through the steps of visual semiotics fieldwork, including hypothesis generation, site selection and access, data gathering and analysis leading to findings that potentially can contribute generalizable knowledge.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6400 - Cross-Cultural Design: Analysis and ApplicationWhat role does culture play in the design of images for communication? This course surveys perspectives from interdisciplinary discourse on what constitutes culture and its impact on meaning. Through readings on theory and criticism and analyses of media and research-generated data students learn what constitutes cultural difference and communicate that knowledge through a codex they write and design.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: any graphics course.
COMM 6410 - Ethnography and Cultural Analysis: This course focuses on theories, perspectives, and methods of ethnography, and on their applications to the various disciplines in which graduate students are working. Emphasis is given to foundational activities: defining a problem, research design, proposal writing, field methods, and protection of human subjects. Students will undertake original field research involving interviews, multi-sited fieldwork, participant-observation, situated ethnography, archival work, focus groups, and audio/videotaping.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6420 - Foundations of Human-Computer Interaction Usability: This course will consider methods for gathering users requirements for product functions and information, ways to test products and information for usability and suitability, and procedures for incorporating the results learned through testing. Students will design and conduct usability tests on products, documents, and interfaces of interest.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4420. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6430 - Design for Global Society: How do images communicate meaning in global society? In this course, students use a social semiotic approach to interpret images that permeate cultural boundaries and impact the way people think and behave. Visual and verbal assignments enforce students ability to communicate how images either instill or enforce values and propagate ideas; a user-research project allows students to gather data to test their own image hypotheses. Special emphasis will be placed on developing students cross-cultural awareness of images.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4430; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6480 - Theory and Research in Technical Communication and Human-Computer Interaction: This seminar course examines theories that have shaped, and continue to drive, the fields of technical communication and human-computer interaction with an emphasis upon the ways each field makes new knowledge. Connections between theoretical findings, research results, and the evolution of both fields as they are practiced in industry, government, and academia are important themes. Course work includes lectures, discussions, student presentations, and written projects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: COMM 1510 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6510 - Communication Theory: Introduces students to a range of theories from across the humanities and social sciences: theories of meaning, discourse, persuasion, interpersonal communication, and mass communication. Also introduces students to how theories are constructed and how knowledge is generated in communication studies.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6530 - Media Communication Research: This course is designed to give training in field and experimental research methods, especially in scientific and technological communication. The student designs and conducts preliminary research projects as time permits.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6540 - Communication Research II: This course is designed to give training in field and experimental research methods, especially in scientific and technological communication. The student designs and conducts preliminary research projects as time permits.When Offered: A fall-spring sequence annually.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6560 - Visual Design: Theory and Application: This course introduces students to the theoretical and practical use of graphics as a form of visual communication. Discussions include such topics as visual perception, design theory, formatted text, and graphics. Students have an opportunity to put theory into practice using computer graphics software.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4460. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses. For graduate students, one additional assignment will be required and their work will be evaluated at a higher level.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6570 - Typography: This course teaches the principles of typesetting text effectively for hypothetical and real-world communication. Students practice selecting typefaces, point-sizes, leading, line-length, color, justification, layouts, kerning, and tracking for printed and digitized type. An RPI-sponsored, entrepreneurial component allows student teams to conduct typographic makeovers for real-world clients and individual students to explore typographic innovation for real-world audiences.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4570.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6600 - Research Design and Analysis for New Media: A practicum in research focusing on methodology for assessing Web usage and computer-mediated behavior. Topics include research design issues, data gathering, sample frames, recruitment and treatment of subjects, and quantitative analysis of online surveys, server bits, and other forms of direct and unobtrusive data.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: at least one previous 4000-level research course; one course in statistics is advisable.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6620 - Information Architecture: This course examines theoretical and empirical issues in the field of Information Architecture, aiming to identify and utilize principles of information organization, collect and interpret empirical data on human information behavior, and develop and apply methods of information design all in the service of creating usable architectures of information. Focus is on developing experience for professional information architecture projects. Requires basic knowledge of Web design.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6660 - Visual Literacy: This course examines the notion of visual literacy—the ability to create effective visual layouts and analyze visual language for meaning. Through readings, discussions, and praxis exercises, students learn the lexicon of visual communication, how to critically evaluate a visual argument, and how to apply visual literacy theory to practice.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4660. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6700 - Rhetoric of the Photograph: Photography is the first modern visual technology that is reproducible yet still has an aura of objectivity, and its study addresses issues that are central to all forms of contemporary image-making. Using the rhetorical triad of producer,work, and audience, this course explores the photograph through: 1) a visual semiotics that is applicable to other kinds of image/ texts, 2) a psychology/ psychodynamics of affect, and 3) an analysis of how the circulation and reinterpretation of photographs and other images shape our culture.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate standing or permission of instructor.When Offered: Odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6730 - Computer-Mediated Communication: This seminar examines the social uses and impacts of computer-mediated communication in contexts such as education, industry, and informal social interaction. Students may examine traditionally important variables such as self-disclosure, rules, status, power, message sequencing, etc., as well as processes such as reality construction, learning, decision making, and group development. The course introduces analytic procedures that are as useful for spoken or written discourse as for computer-mediated discourse.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6740 - Hypermedia Design and Development: This seminar course will investigate issues in hypermedia design and development. Class discussions will include topics such as designing the structure of a hypermedia program and designing the user interface. Students will have an opportunity to put theory into practice by designing and developing an interactive program.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: COMM 4460, COMM 6400, COMM 6560, or permission of the instructor.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6750 - Communication Design for the World Wide Web: This course introduces hypermedia interface design and communication issues involved in designing interactive programs for the World Wide Web. Students will design and develop an interactive Web site or experience and explore related rhetorical, social, cultural, and legal issues.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: 1) completion of Web development or hypermedia development course and 2) knowledge of basics of Web or hypermedia development, or 3) permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6770 - User-Experience Design: Designing an effective and enjoyable user experience involves more than just responding to specification requirements; it requires designers to understand user needs and expectations, the work that users do, and the environment in which they do their work. Students will learn and practice how to design a user experience and evaluate how effective they have been.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: COMM 4420, COMM 6420 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4770; students taking COMM 6770 will be assigned an additional project. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6780 - Interactive Narrative: This course introduces students to narrative theory andinteractive narratives in a variety of genres such as oral story-telling, literature, poetry, film, artists books, historical narrative, hypertext fiction, Net Art, social media narratives, and computer games. Students will have the opportunity to design and develop an original interactive narrative.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4780. Students may not receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
COMM 6790 - Media Studies: This course is a graduate seminar examining major theories and approaches to studying the media from a cultural studies perspective, with a particular focus on the medium of television. Topics will include: the politics of representation; commercialization; celebrity; media institutions; fictional and factual programming; gender, race, and class.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6800 - Media and Memory: Most memories of the past are stories that circulate in the present through a variety of media. To probe the mechanism of collective memory, this course combines exploration of several visual media with case studies that interpret the rhetorical potential of specific photographs, films, museums, and monuments.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4800. Students cannot obtain credit for both courses. Graduate students are required to complete additional assignments.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6810 - Studio Design in Human-Computer Interaction: In this course, students work on collaborative projects to design human-computer interactions (HCIs) aimed at transforming peoples everyday practices. Students work with activity analysis, object-oriented modeling, and UI prototyping. The course serves as the capstone in the HCI MS Certificate.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: COMM 6420, COMM 6750, or COMM 6770.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4180; students cannot obtain credit for both courses. Additional assignments required for students at the 6000 level.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6820 - Usability Testing: In this course, students will examine and practice several methods of formal usability testing. Classes will consist of classroom discussion of scenario-based testing methods and statistical analysis of data collected and of laboratory sessions in which students develop, conduct, record, and analyze usability tests.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COMM 4820. For COMM 6820, additional statistical analysis as part of each assignment and a literature-based paper on a usability topic are required.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6830 - Human-Media Interaction: Advanced survey course on psychological approaches to human media interaction. Key themes are 1) how minds have evolved to interact with media and computers in certain ways; 2) how media form and content influence the mind; 3) how minds socially respond to computers; 4) how media and computers create a sense of being there and/or being together with someone; and 5) how properties of human cognition are affected by the form, content, and use of media.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6940 - Communication Studies: Readings and projects adapted to the needs of individual students.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
COMM 6960 - Topics in Communication: Experimental courses tried out in one or two terms.Credit Hours: 3
COMM 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
COMM 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
CSCI 1010 - Introduction to Computer Programming: Computer programming is a way of thinking. A successful programmer needs to take a word problem, generate a pseudocode algorithm, and convert it to the syntax of a specific programming language. This course is an alternative to CSCI 1100 and is intended for students who want an introduction to this programming process but do not intend to do further course work in programming or computer science. Emphasis will be on the generation of the algorithms. Rather than using the complex syntax of a production language such as C or C++, this course will use Visual Basic. This allows concentration on the fundamentals and without becoming sidetracked by language complexity. It also affords students a tool for creating useful personal applications or prototypes in the future. Students cannot get credit for this course if they have already taken any other CSCI course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 1100 - Computer Science I: An introduction to computer programming algorithm design and analysis. Additional topics include basic computer organization; internal representation of scalar and array data; use of top-down design and subprograms to tackle complex problems; abstract data types. Enrichment material as time allows. Interdisciplinary case studies, numerical and nonnumerical applications. Students who have passed CSCI 1200 cannot register for this course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5
CSCI 1190 - Beginning Programming for Engineers: This course teaches elementary programming concepts using the MATLAB environment for engineering students with little or no prior programming experience. Concepts include variables, looping, and function calls. Students cannot get credit for CSCI 1190 after earning credit for CSCI 1100 or any higher-level CSCI course.When Offered: Half-term courses offered fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
CSCI 1200 - Data Structures: Programming concepts: functions, parameter passing, pointers, arrays, strings, structs, classes, templates. Mathematical tools: sets, functions, and relations, order notation, complexity of algorithms, proof by induction. Data structures and their representations: data abstraction and internal representation, sequences, trees, binary search trees, associative structures. Algorithms: searching and sorting, generic algorithms, iterative and recursive algorithms. Methods of testing correctness and measuring performance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 1100 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6
CSCI 2200 - Foundations of Computer Science: This course introduces important mathematical and theoretical tools for computer science, including topics from set theory, combinatorics, and probability theory, and then proceeds to automata theory, the Turing Machine model of computation, and notions of computational complexity. The course will emphasize formal reasoning and proof techniques.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 1200 and Intro to Calculus (MATH 1010 or MATH 1500); MATH 1020 is strongly recommended.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5
CSCI 2300 - Introduction to Algorithms: Data structures and algorithms, and the mathematical techniques necessary to design and analyze them. Basic data structures: lists, associative structures, trees. Mathematical techniques for designing algorithms and analyzing worst-case and expected-case algorithm efficiency. Advanced data structures: balanced trees, tries, heaps, priority queues, graphs. Searching, sorting. Algorithm design techniques: dynamic programming, greedy algorithms, divide-and-conquer, backtracking. Example graph, string, geometric, and numeric algorithms.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 1200, MATH 1010, and CSCI 2200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6
CSCI 2500 - Computer Organization: Introduction to computer organization, assembler language, and operating systems. Computer systems organization: processors, memory, I/O. Digital logic: gates, Boolean algebra, digital logic circuits, memory, buses. Microprogramming. Machine level: instruction formats, addressing modes, instruction types, flow of control. Operating systems: virtual memory, virtual I/O instructions, processes, interprocess communication. Numeric representation. Assembler language: the assembly process, macros, linking, loading. Advanced architectures: RISC architectures, parallel architectures.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 1200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6
CSCI 2600 - Principles of Software: A study of important concepts in software design, implementation, and testing. Topics include specification, abstraction with classes, design principles and patterns, testing, refactoring, the software development process, GUI and event-driven programming, and cloud-based programming. The course also introduces implementation and testing tools, including IDEs, revision control systems, and other frameworks. The overarching goal of the course is for students to learn how to write correct and maintainable software.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 1200 and CSCI 2200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4020 - Computer Algorithms: Basic algorithm design strategies such as greedy, dynamic programming, backtracking, and branch-and-bound; main approaches, including exact, probabilistic, approximate, and heuristic algorithms; sequential and parallel algorithms; algorithms for networks, string matching, matrix operations, and cryptography; learning algorithms.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4050 - Computability and Complexity: This course discusses concepts of languages defined by formal grammars, Turing machines and rewriting systems, computability, Church-Turing thesis, decidable and undecidable problems, computational complexity, polynomial reducibility, NP-completeness, and Cooks theorem. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4050 and CSCI 6050.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 6050.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4100 - Machine Learning from Data: Introduction to the theory, algorithms, and applications of machine learning (supervised, reinforcement, and unsupervised) from data: What is learning? Is learning feasible? How can we do it? How can we do it well? The course offers a mix of theory, technique, and application with additional selected topics chosen from Pattern Recognition, Decision Trees, Neural Networks, RBFs, Bayesian Learning, PAC Learning, Support Vector Machines, Gaussian processes, and Hidden Markov Models. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4100 and CSCI 6100.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300; an advanced 4000-level algorithms-based CSCI or MATH course; familiarity with probability, linear algebra, and calculus.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 6100.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4110 - Computational Social Processes: Introduction to the computational and algorithmic aspects of social processes. Topics covered will be selected to illustrate the diverse challenges in algorithmic social process analysis: social networks and their dynamics; information flow; hidden networks. Algorithms involving social and selfish agents, social choice theory, voting, and auctions. Ranking actors in networks, recommendation systems, peer-review, and aggregation of rankings/reviews. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4110 and CSCI 6110.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 and an advanced 4000-level algorithms-based CSCI or MATH course.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years, upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: CSCI 6110.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4120 - Computational Finance: Introduction to the computational and mathematical techniques for practical financial applications. The course will emphasize the algorithmic side of finance. Topics will be selected from pricing (options and derivatives), trading, risk-evaluation, selfish agents, sequential decisions, and portfolio optimization. Examples of the mathematical and algorithmic techniques covered are martingale measures, risk-neutral pricing and Monte Carlo, dynamic programing, and stochastic processes. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4120 and CSCI 6120.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300; an advanced 4000-level algorithms-based CSCI or MATH course; familiarity with probability, linear algebra, and calculus.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years, upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: CSCI 6120.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4150 - Introduction to Artificial Intelligence: Topics and techniques of artificial intelligence using the language LISP. Topics include search, knowledge representation, expert systems, theorem proving, natural language interfaces, learning, game playing, and computer vision. Techniques include pattern matching, data-driven programming, substitution rules, frames, heuristic search, transition networks, neural networks, and evolutionary computation. Development of programming proficiency in LISP is emphasized.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4210 - Operating Systems: Discussion of various aspects of computer operating systems design and implementation. Topics include I/O programming, concurrent processes and synchronization problems, process management and scheduling of processes, virtual memory management, device management, file systems, deadlock problems, system calls, and interprocess communication. Programming projects are required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 and CSCI 2500.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4220 - Network Programming: Programming with an overview of the principles of computer networks, including a detailed look at the OSI reference model and various popular network protocol suites. Concentration on Unix interprocess communication (IPC), network programming using TCP and UDP, as well as client-side and mobile programming. Programming projects are required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4210.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4230 - Cryptography and Network Security I: A self-contained course that includes topics from number theory, basic cryptography, and protocol security. This is a hybrid course with sufficient depth in both theory and hands-on experience with network protocols. Topics include: Classical Cryptography, Block Ciphers (DES, AES), Information Theoretical Cryptography, Randomness, RNG and Stream Ciphers, Hash and MAC Algorithms, Public-Key Cryptography, Elliptic Curve Cryptography, Digital Signatures and Identification, Internet Attacks, Web Security, SSL and PGP. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4230 and CSCI 6230.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300; also desirable is CSCI 4210 and CSCI 4220.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 6230.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 4240 - Cryptography and Network Security II: A course covering advanced security topics with depth both in theory and hands-on exercises. Topics include: Probabilistic Encryption, Deniable Cryptography, Hardcore Predicates, All-or-Nothing Encryption, Secret Sharing, Subliminal/Covert Channels, Mental Poker, Goldwasser-Micali and Blum-Goldwasser Cryptosystems, Paillier PKC and Homomorphism, Elliptic Curve Cryptography, and Blind Signatures and E-cash. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4240 and CSCI 6240.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 4230/6230; ECSE 4670 or CSCI 4220 or permission of instructor; also desirable is CSCI 4210.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 6240.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 4250 - Frontiers of Network Science: This course will offer an introduction to network science and a review of current research in this area. Classes will interchangeably present chapters from the textbook and related current research. The emphasis will be on the mathematical background of network science: graphs and networks; random networks and various types of scale-free networks; network properties such as assortativity, mobility, robustness, social networks, and communities; and dynamics of spreading in networks. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4250 and CSCI 6250.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300; a 4000-level algorithms-based CSCI course (e.g., 4020, 4050, 4260, 4800) or MATH course (e.g., 4100, 4150, 4200, 4210, 4800); familiarity with probability, linear algebra, and calculus; or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: CSCI 6250.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4260 - Graph Theory: Fundamental concepts and methods of graph theory and its applications to computing and the social and natural sciences. Topics include graphs as models, representation of graphs, trees, distances, matchings, connectivity, flows in networks, graph colorings, Hamiltonian cycles, traveling salesman problem, planarity. All concepts, methods, and applications are presented through a sequence of exercises and problems, many of which are done with the help of novel software systems for combinatorial computing. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4260 and MATH 4150.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 1100 and CSCI 2200.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: MATH 4150.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4320 - Parallel Programming: Techniques and methods for parallel programming: models of parallel machines and programs, efficiency and complexity of parallel algorithms. Paradigms of parallel programming and corresponding extensions to sequential programming languages. Overview of parallel languages and coordination languages and models; programming on networks of workstations. Basic parallel algorithms: elementary computation, matrix multiplication, sorting; sample scientific application.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 and CSCI 2500.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4350 - Data Science: Data science is advancing the inductive conduct of science and is driven by the greater volumes, complexity, and heterogeneity of data being made available over the Internet. It combines aspects of data management, library science, computer science, and physical science. It is changing the way all of these disciplines do both their individual and collaborative work. Key methodologies in application areas based on real research experience are taught.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Data Structures (CSCI 1200), Database Systems (CSCI 4380) preferred.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 4350/6350, CSCI 6350 and ERTH 4350/6350. Students can obtain credits for only one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 4370 - Data and Society: Data and Society provides a broad overview of how society is leveraging and responding to the social, organizational, policy, and technical opportunities and challenges of a data-driven world. Course themes focus on various aspects of the data ecosystem, data and innovation, and data and the broader community. Assignments build writing, presentation, and critical thinking, and assessment skills, all of which are important for professional success. <span style="background-color:rgb(255,255,255);">This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CSCI 4350/6350 or ITWS 4350/6350 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 6370. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4370 and CSCI 6370.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4380 - Database Systems: Discussion of the state of practice in modern database systems, with an emphasis on relational systems. Topics include database design, database system architecture, SQL, normalization techniques, storage structures, query processing, concurrency control, recovery, security, and new directions such as object-oriented and distributed database systems. Students gain hands-on experience with commercial database systems and interface building tools. Programming projects are required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4390 - Database Mining: This course will provide an introductory survey of the main topics in data mining and knowledge discovery in databases (KDD), including: classification, clustering, association rules, sequence mining, similarity search, deviation detection, and so on. Emphasis will be on the algorithmic and system issues in KDD, as well as on applications such as Web mining, multimedia mining, bioinformatics, geographical information systems, etc. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4390 and CSCI 6390.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 6390.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4400 - Xinformatics: Informatics covers a broad range of disciplines addressing challenges in the explosion of data and information resources. Xinformatics provides commonality for implementations in specific disciplines, e.g. X=astro, geo. Informatics theoretical bases are information and computer science, cognitive science, social science, library science, aggregating these studies and adding the practice of information processing, and the engineering of information systems. This course grounds the material that students will learn in discipline areas by coursework and project assignments. Note: Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ITWS 4400 or ITWS6400.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CSCI 1200 and Data Science (CSCI/ERTH/ITWS 496x/696x).When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 6400, CSCI 6400 and ERTH 4400/6400. Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 4430 - Programming Languages: This course is a study of the important concepts found in current programming languages. Topics include language processing (lexical analysis, parsing, type-checking, interpretation and compilation, run-time environment), the role of abstraction (data abstraction and control abstraction), programming paradigms (procedural, functional, object-oriented, logic-oriented, generic), and formal language definition. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4430 and CSCI 6430.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 6430.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4440 - Software Design and Documentation: Software system design methodology emphasizing use of object oriented modeling of application domains and of software systems, and emphasizing the roles of written and oral communication in software engineering. Project management and software testing. Individual and team projects include specification, software architecture, user interfaces, and documentation of the phases of a project. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4450 - Principles of Program Analysis: The goal of this course is to introduce students to program analysis and its many applications in software engineering, particularly in improving software quality and software productivity. Concretely, students who successfully complete this course should be able to: (1) understand and apply program analysis techniques, such as dataflow analysis and type-based analysis; (2) implement program analysis; (3) understand and apply software testing techniques, such as black-box testing and white-box testing; and (4) understand and apply refactoring techniques.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 and CSCI 2600.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: CSCI 6450. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4450 and CSCI 6450.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4480 - Robotics IA survey of the fundamental issues necessary for the design, analysis, control, and implementation of robotic systems. The mathematical description of robot manipulators in terms of kinematics and dynamics. Hardware components of a typical robot arm. Path following, control, and sensing. Examples of several currently available manipulators.
CSCI 4490 - Robotics II: This course introduces methods that leverage the basic analysis techniques learned in Robotics I to  develop numerical and algorithmic techniques needed to endow robots with the intelligence to devise strategies to solve problems they will encounter. Once these abilities are sufficiently well developed, robots will become safe and autonomous, thus paving the way for pervasive personal  robots. Topics include: configuration space representation, cell decomposition, roadmap methods, rapidly-exploring random trees, simultaneous localization and mapping, contact modeling, grasping, and dexterous manipulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite/Corequisite: CSCI 4480.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with CSCI 6490, ECSE 4490, ECSE 6490.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 4500 - Distributed Computing Over The Internet: This course will enable students to understand and apply theoretical foundations of programming concurrent, distributed, and mobile computing systems, namely process calculi, actors, join calculus, and mobile ambients. In the practical part, students will compare communication and synchronization aspects in concurrent programming languages following these theoretical models. Students will also review current research on distributed computing over the Internet, on topics including but not limited to coordination, mobility, heterogeneity, security, fault tolerance, scalability, programmability, and verification. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4500 and CSCI 6500.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 4430 and CSCI 4220 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 6500.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4510 - Distributed Systems and Algorithms: This course explores the principles of distributed systems, emphasizing fundamental issues underlying the design of such systems: communication, coordination, synchronization, and fault-tolerance. Key algorithms and theoretical results will be studied and students will explore how these foundations play out in modern systems and applications.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4210.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 6510. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4510 and CSCI 6510.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4520 - Game Development: This class is a practical primer for anyone interested in a career in the rapidly evolving industry of video gaming. It is an intense, team-based, project-based course in which students will closely follow the actual game development cycle, with each team producing a complete PC game. Students cannot get credit for both this course and COGS 4520.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: COGS 2520 or CSCI 2300.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4



CSCI 4530 - Advanced Computer GraphicsThis course will survey classic papers and current research in computer graphics. Topics include: advanced ray tracing, global illumination, photon mapping, subsurface scattering, mesh generation and simplification, subdivision surfaces, volumetric modeling, procedural modeling and texturing, weathering, physical simulation, appearance models. Course activities include programming assignments, oral presentations, and a term project. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4530 and CSCI 6530. <span style="background-color:rgb(255,255,255);">This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300; previous coursework or experience in computer graphics such as ECSE 4750 or computational geometry is recommended.
CSCI 4540 - Game Development II: This course follows Game Development I. Students work in interdisciplinary teams to create one large-scale 3D game, working from concept to public release. Projects may include games, educational games, serious games and simulations, and interactive artworks, and will focus on creative design, technical execution, and use of game design principles. The course builds on skills and knowledge in previous courses in the GSAS core, including game design, game mechanics, game programming, art, and narrative.
CSCI 4550 - Interactive Visualization: Visualizing data is a key step in understanding many problems. This course is designed to introduce students to methods of visualizing many different types of data, such as images, three-dimensional surfaces, flow fields, and medical data. Both existing visualization software and program custom visualizations using C++ and OpenGL will be used. Course activities include discussion of recent and classic research papers, weekly homework assignments, in-class critiques of visualization artifacts, and a final project to explore creative uses of these techniques.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 and CSCI 2600, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: CSCI 6550. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4550 and CSCI 6550.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4650 - Networking Laboratory I: A studio course with an interactive learning style that utilizes a lab of over 260 routers and switches. Configuration labs include: Virtual LANs, Spanning Tree, and inter-switch communication on Gigabit switches; Class A, B, and C IP addressing using VLSM; Routing protocols including Static, Default, OSPF, OSPFv3, EIGRP, and BGP routing; WAN protocols including PPP and Frame Relay; IPv6.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: Any 2000-level CSCI/ECSE/ITWS course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4660 - Networking Laboratory II: A studio course with an interacive learning style that utilizes a lab of over 300 routers and switches. Configuration labs include: VLANs, Layer 2 Security, Layer 3 Switching, Advanced Services, High Availability, iPv6, Mul3-Area OSPF, OSPFv3, EIGRP, iBGP, eBGP, IPv4/IPv6 Route Redistribution, and Layer 3 Path Control.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4650.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4670 - Networking Security Laboratory: A studio course with an interactive learning style. Students download tools to compromise (hack) a network. Students will then set up defense strategies in an extensive lab of advanced routers and PIX firewalls. Configuration will include: IPSec, VPN tunnels, Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA), TACACS+ and RADIUS, Intrusion Detection, Context-Based Access Control (CBAC), Nested Object groups, Attack Guards, and Shunning. Self-paced video demonstrations are used in conjunction with hands-on lab experiences.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4650.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4680 - Advanced Networking Practicum: Students complete 8 eight-hour labs on 14 networking devices. This course prepares students to administer a network of 1000+ routers. This is a hands-on lab course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4660.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4800 - Numerical Computing: A survey of numerical methods for scientific and engineering problems. Topics include numerical solution of linear and nonlinear algebraic equations, interpolation and least squares approximations, numerical integration and differentiation, eigenvalue problems, and an introduction to the numerical solution of ordinary differential equations. Emphasis is placed on efficient computational procedures including the use of library and student written procedures using high-level software such as MATLAB.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 1100 and MATH 2010 or ENGR 1100. Corequisite: MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MATH 4800. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATH 4800.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4820 - Introduction to Numerical Methods for Differential Equations: Derivation, analysis, and use of computational procedures for solving differential equations. Topics covered include ordinary differential equations (both initial value and boundary value problems) and partial differential equations. Runge-Kutta and multistep methods for initial value problems. Finite difference methods for partial differential equations including techniques for heat conduction, wave propagation, and potential problems. Basic convergence and stability theory.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MATH 4820.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 4940 - Readings in Computer Science: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
CSCI 4960 - Topics in Computer Science: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
CSCI 6050 - Computability and Complexity: This course discusses modern concepts of computability and computational complexity theories. The Church-Turing thesis; variations of Turing Machines; Algorithms; Decidability; The Halting Problem; Reducibility; The Recursion Theorem; The Concept of Information; Time and Space Complexity; Intractability; NP-completeness and Cooks theorem. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4050 and CSCI 6050.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4050.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6100 - Machine Learning from Data: Introduction to the theory, algorithms, and applications of machine learning (supervised, reinforcement, and unsupervised) from data: What is learning? Is learning feasible? How can we do it? How can we do it well? The course offers a mix of theory, technique, and application with additional selected topics chosen from Pattern Recognition, Decision Trees, Neural Networks, RBFs, Bayesian Learning, PAC Learning, Support Vector Machines, Gaussian processes, and Hidden Markov Models. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4100 and CSCI 6100.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300; an advanced 4000-level algorithms-based CSCI or MATH course; familiarity with probability, linear algebra, and calculus.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4100.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6110 - Computational Social Processes: Introduction to the computational and algorithmic aspects of social processes. Topics covered will be selected to illustrate the diverse challenges in algorithmic social process analysis: social networks and their dynamics; information flow; hidden networks. Algorithms involving social and selfish agents, social choice theory, voting, and auctions. Ranking actors in networks, recommendation systems, peer-review, and aggregation of rankings/reviews. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4110 and CSCI 6110.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 and an advanced 4000-level algorithms-based CSCI or MATH course.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years, upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: CSCI 4110Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6120 - Computational Finance: Introduction to the computational and mathematical techniques for practical financial applications. The course will emphasize the algorithmic side of finance. Topics will be selected from pricing (options and derivatives), trading, risk-evaluation, selfish agents, sequential decisions, and portfolio optimization. Examples of the mathematical and algorithmic techniques covered are martingale measures, risk-neutral pricing and Monte Carlo, dynamic programing, and stochastic processes. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4120 and CSCI 6120.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300; an advanced 4000-level algorithms-based CSCI or MATH course; familiarity with probability, linear algebra, and calculus.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years, upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: CSCI 4120.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6140 - Computer Operating Systems: Topics include analysis of multiprogramming systems, virtual memory, computer system performance, and queuing theory. The course also discusses tools for synchronization of parallel programs and algorithms for mutual exclusion.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4210 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6210 - Design and Analysis of Algorithms: Theoretical and empirical analysis of algorithms; tools for on-line monitoring of the algorithm’s performance. Advanced algorithms for polynomial problems; randomized heuristic and approximate algorithms. Problems include computation in discrete mathematics, number theory, linear algebra, graph theory, numerical and symbolic computing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4020 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6220 - Randomized Algorithms:
CSCI 6230 - Cryptography and Network Security I: A self-contained course that includes topics from number theory, basic cryptography, and protocol security. This is a hybrid course with sufficient depth in both theory and hands-on experience with network protocols. Topics include: Classical Cryptography, Block Ciphers (DES, AES), Information Theoretical Cryptography, Randomness, RNG and Stream Ciphers, Hash and MAC Algorithms, Public-Key Cryptography, Elliptic Curve Cryptography, Digital Signatures and Identification, Internet Attacks, Web Security, SSL and PGP. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4230 and CSCI 6230.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300; also desirable is CSCI 4210 and CSCI 4220.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4230Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6240 - Cryptography and Network Security II: A course covering advanced security topics with depth both in theory and hands-on exercises. Topics include: Probabilistic Encryption, Deniable Cryptography, Hardcore Predicates, All-or-Nothing Encryption, Secret Sharing, Subliminal/Covert Channels, Mental Poker, Goldwasser-Micali and Blum-Goldwasser Cryptosystems, Paillier PKC and Homomorphism, Elliptic Curve Cryptography, and Blind Signatures and E-cash. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4240 and CSCI 6240.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 4230/6230; ECSE 4670 or CSCI 4220 or permission of instructor; also desirable is CSCI 4210.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4240.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6250 - Frontiers of Network Science: This course will offer an introduction to network science and a review of current research in this area. Classes will interchangeably present chapters from the textbook and related current research. The emphasis will be on the mathematical background of network science: graphs and networks; random networks and various types of scale-free networks; network properties such as assortativity, mobility, robustness, social networks, and communities; and dynamics of spreading in networks. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4250 and CSCI 6250.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300; a 4000-level algorithms-based CSCI course (e.g., 4020, 4050, 4260, 4800) or MATH course (e.g., 4100, 4150, 4200, 4210, 4800) course; familiarity with probability, linear algebra, and calculus; or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: CSCI 4250.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6270 - Computational Vision: Introduction to the problems and techniques of vision from a computational perspective. Discussion includes computational theories of vision and particular topics such as image formation, image processing, linear systems, Fourier transforms, mathematical morphology, edge and contour detection, shape from shading, stereo, motion, surface reconstruction, robust techniques, three-dimensional representation and reasoning, object recognition, and computational geometry.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 or equivalent and programming experience.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6350 - Data Science: Data science is advancing the inductive conduct of science and is driven by the greater volumes, complexity, and heterogeneity of data being made available over the Internet. It combines aspects of data management, library science, computer science, and physical science. It is changing the way all of these disciplines do both their individual and collaborative work. Key methodologies in application areas based on real research experience are taught.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Data Structures (CSCI 1200), Database Systems (CSCI 4380) preferred.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 4350/6350, CSCI 4350 and ERTH 4350/6350. Students can obtain credits for only one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6360 - Parallel Computing: A survey of fundamental issues in design of efficient programs for parallel computers. The topics discussed include models of parallel machines and programs, efficiency of parallel algorithms, programming styles for shared memory, message passing, data parallelism, and using MPI in scientific parallel programs. Parallel programming project required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4210 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6370 - Data and Society: Data and Society provides a broad overview of how society is leveraging and responding to the social, organizational, policy, and technical opportunities and challenges of a data-driven world. Course themes focus on various aspects of the data ecosystem, data and innovation, and data and the broader community. Data and Society is a communication-intensive course. Assignments build writing, presentation, and critical thinking and assessment skills, all of which are important for professional success. <span style="background-color:rgb(255,255,255);">This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CSCI 4350/6350 or ITWS 4350/6350 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4370. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4370 and CSCI 6370.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6390 - Database Mining: This course will provide an introductory survey of the main topics in data mining and knowledge discovery in databases (KDD), including: classification, clustering, association rules, sequence mining, similarity search, deviation detection, and so on. Emphasis will be on the algorithmic and system issues in KDD, as well as on applications such as Web mining, multimedia mining, bioinformatics, geographical information systems, etc. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4390 and CSCI 6390.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2200 and CSCI 2300.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4390.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6400 - Xinformatics: Informatics covers a broad range of disciplines addressing challenges in the explosion of data and information resources. Xinformatics provides commonality for implementations in specific disciplines, e.g. X=astro, geo. Informatics theoretical bases are information and computer science, cognitive science, social science, library science, aggregating these studies and adding the practice of information processing, and the engineering of information systems. This course grounds the material that students will learn in discipline areas by coursework and project assignments.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CSCI 1200 and Data Science (CSCI/ERTH/ITWS 496x/696x).When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 4400/6400, CSCI 4400 and ERTH 4400/6400. Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6430 - Programming Languages: This course is a study of the important concepts found in current programming languages. Topics include language processing (lexical analysis, parsing, type-checking, interpretation and compilation, run-time environment), the role of abstraction (data abstraction and control abstraction), programming paradigms (procedural, functional, object-oriented, logic-oriented, generic), and formal language definition. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4430 and CSCI 6430.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 2300.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4430.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6450 - Principles of Program Analysis: The goal of this course is to introduce students to program analysis and its many applications in software engineering, particularly in improving software quality and software productivity. Concretely, students who successfully complete this course should be able to: (1) understand and apply program analysis techniques, such as dataflow analysis and type-based analysis; (2) implement program analysis; (3) understand and apply software testing techniques, such as black-box testing and white-box testing; and (4) understand and apply refactoring techniques.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 and CSCI 2600.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: CSCI 4450. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4450 and CSCI 6450.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6490 - Robotics II: This course introduces methods that leverage the basic analysis techniques learned in Robotics I to develop numerical and algorithmic techniques needed to endow robots with the intelligence to devise strategies to solve problems they will encounter. Once these abilities are sufficiently well developed, robots will become safe and autonomous, thus paving the way for pervasive personal robots. Topics include: configuration space representation, cell decomposition, roadmap methods, rapidly-exploring random trees, simultaneous localization and mapping, contact modeling, grasping, and dexterous manipulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4480.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECSE 6490, CSCI 4490, ECSE 4490.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6500 - Distributed Computing Over The Internet: This course will enable students to understand and apply theoretical foundations of programming concurrent, distributed, and mobile computing systems, namely process calculi, actors, join calculus, and mobile ambients. In the practical part, students will compare communication and synchronization aspects in concurrent programming languages following these theoretical models. Students will also review current research on distributed computing over the Internet, on topics including but not limited to coordination, mobility, heterogeneity, security, fault tolerance, scalability, programmability, and verification.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 4220 and CSCI 4430 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4500. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4500 and CSCI 6500.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6510 - Distributed Systems and Algorithms: This course explores the principles of distributed systems, emphasizing fundamental issues underlying the design of such systems: communication, coordination, synchronization, and fault-tolerance. Key algorithms and theoretical results will be studied and students will explore how these foundations play out in modern systems and applications.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 4210.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4510. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4510 and CSCI 6510.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6530 - Advanced Computer Graphics: In this course, there will be a survey of classic papers and current research in computer graphics. Topics include: advanced ray tracing, global illumination, photon mapping, subsurface scattering, mesh generation and simplification, subdivision surfaces, volumetric modeling, procedural modeling and texturing, weathering, physical simulation, appearance models. Course activities include programming assignments, oral presentations, and a term project. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4530 and CSCI 6530.<span style="background-color:rgb(255,255,255)">This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300; previous coursework or experience in computer graphics such as ECSE 4750 or computational geometry is recommended.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: CSCI 4530.Credit Hours: 3
CSCI 6550 - Interactive Visualization: Visualizing data is a key step in understanding many problems. This course is designed to introduce students to methods of visualizing many different types of data, such as images, three-dimensional surfaces, flow fields, and medical data. Both existing visualization software and program custom visualizations using C++ and OpenGL will be used. Course activities include discussion of recent and classic research papers, weekly homework assignments, in-class critiques of visualization artifacts, and a final project to explore creative uses of these techniques.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 and CSCI 2600, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: CSCI 4550. Students cannot receive credit for both CSCI 4550 and CSCI 6550.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6800 - Computational Linear Algebra: Gaussian elimination, special linear systems (such as positive definite, banded, or sparse), introduction to parallel computing, iterative methods for linear systems (such as conjugate gradient and preconditioning), QR factorization and least squares problems, and eigenvalue problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MATH 6800. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATH 6800.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6820 - Numerical Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations: Numerical methods and analysis for ODEs with applications from mechanics, optics, and chaotic dynamics. Numerical methods for dynamic systems include Runge-Kutta, multistep and extrapolation techniques, methods for conservative and Hamiltonian systems, methods for stiff differential equations and for differential-algebraic systems. Methods for boundary value problems include shooting and orthogonalization, finite difference and collocation techniques, and special methods for problems with boundary or shock layers.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as  MATH 6820. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATH 6820.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6840 - Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations: Numerical methods and analysis for linear and nonlinear PDEs with applications from heat conduction, wave propagation, solid and fluid mechanics, and other areas. Basic concepts of stability and convergence (Lax equivalence theorem, CFL condition, energy methods). Methods for parabolic problems (finite differences, method of lines, ADI, operator splitting), methods for hyperbolic problems (vector systems and characteristics, dissipation and dispersion, shocks capturing and tracking schemes), methods for elliptic problems (finite difference and finite volume methods). Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MATH 6840. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATH 6840.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6860 - Finite Element Analysis: Galerkins method and extremal principles, finite element approximations (Lagrange, hierarchical and 3-D approximations, interpolation errors), mesh generation and assembly, adaptivity (h-, p-, hp-refinement). Error analysis and convergence rates. Perturbations resulting from boundary approximation, numerical integration, etc. Time dependent problems including parabolic and hyperbolic PDEs. Applications will be selected from several areas including heat conduction, wave propagation, potential theory, and solid and fluid mechanics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MATH 6860. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATH 6860.Credit Hours: 4
CSCI 6900 - Computer Science Seminar: Presentation of current developments in computer science. Reports by students.Credit Hours: 1
CSCI 6940 - Readings in Computer Science: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CSCI 6960 - Topics in Computer Science: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
CSCI 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Masters program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
CSCI 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
CSCI 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
CSCI 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
ECON 1200 - Introductory Economics: Every society faces the question of choosing how to use its natural and human resources to produce goods and services and how to distribute these resources among its people. This course studies how these choices are made in markets. It also explains the determinants of total output, employment, and inflation. Attention may also be given to special topics such as the environment, trade, and population.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 2010 - Intermediate Microeconomic Theory: Applies the microeconomic theory of the firm to price, cost, and output decisions of business enterprises under different market structures. Regression analysis of demand and cost, linear programming of production and simulation analysis of risk, and capital budgeting are also presented.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 2020 - Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory: Attention is directed primarily to variations in the aggregate volume of output, income, and employment. Cyclical fluctuations and long-term economic trends are examined and the interrelations of business and government policies are analyzed. The applicability of economic theory to the problems of business forecasting is discussed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 2940 - Readings in Economics: Credit Hours: 3 or 4
ECON 2960 - Topics in Economics: Selected topics in economics designed to acquaint students with modern economic problems and analysis in special areas beyond the introductory level.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1200 or equivalent.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4110 - Economic Analysis of Technological Change: An examination of the economic considerations that influence the creation and assimilation of new products and processes, and of the impact of technological change on the structures and evolution of the American economy and environment. Topics include productivity growth, the organization and management of industrial research and development, the interaction between technological change and industrial structure, diffusion of innovations, and technological unemployment. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4120 - Mathematical Methods in Economics: Application of mathematical techniques to economic modeling and analysis. Construction of models to describe aspects of the economy and to analyze potential policies. Solution methods for issues including optimal choice with and without constraints, equilibria among multiple actors, marginal effects of policies, and dynamic economic models. Some mathematical maturity is assumed, and mathematical skills are taught throughout the course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECON 6120; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4130 - Money and Banking: Financial institutions, especially commercial banking and the Federal Reserve System, are considered from three perspectives: their monetary roles; trends in the economic, organizational, and technological aspects of their operations; and their other economic roles-a critical view. Also, the role of money in macroeconomic theory is considered along with the role of monetary policies in relation to the problems of inflation and unemployment.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4140 - Structure of Industry:  Competition, Innovation, Entrepreneurship, Policy: Acquaints students with the structural characteristics and philosophical foundations of enterprise and industry. Several important industries are considered from the viewpoint of market structure, conduct, and performance. Such concepts as the corporation, entrepreneurial outcomes, technological innovation, private property, and public policy toward business are examined to orient the student to contemporary industrial activity.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECON 6140; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4150 - Economics of Government Regulation: Can government intervention improve the performance of private markets and if so, when and how? How is regulatory policy actually made, and what effects has it had? These questions are applied to the experience in the U.S. and elsewhere with telecommunications, electricity, transportation, financial services, job safety, and environmental regulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4160 - Public Finance: Emphasis is placed on the analysis of efficient resource use in the public sector at the federal level. Expenditure theory, tax incidence, and income distribution policies are discussed. The effects of personal income, corporation, sales, payroll, and property taxes on resource allocation, equity, and growth are considered.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered:  Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4180 - Development of Economic Thought: A critical examination in which comparisons are made and contrasts emphasized between different schools of economic thinking such as classicism, marginalism, socialism, institutionalism, neoclassicism, and Keynesianism. Special attention is given to historical theories and attitudes of economists toward technological change and its impact on human welfare.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4190 - International Economics and Globalization: This course investigates the significance of economic globalization, covering the following topics: international trade and financial flows, technological innovation and intellectual property, technology transfer, national government and transnational corporations, natural resources, health and the environment, impacts on selected industries and countries, and roles of the world trade organization and international monetary fund. The major controversies surrounding globalization are identified, and alternative arguments are evaluated based on available evidence.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered:  Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4200 - International FiananceThis course is an introduction to open economy macroeconomics and international finance. The core objective of the course is to teach students macroeconomic models and enable them to analyze international economic phenomena. Topics covered include theories of intertemporal trade, sources of global imbalances and their adjustment mechanisms, the determination of exchange rates, the effect of fiscal and monetary policies under different exchange rate regimes, balance of payment crisis, consequences of financial globalization.
ECON 4210 - Cost-Benefit Analysis: Addresses the identification and measurement of the economic gains and losses to different sectors of the economy resulting from public projects and policies. Among the projects studied are those in the area of transportation, energy, environment, and urban development. Also considered is the evaluation of the effects of government on business, as for example, consumer product and workplace safety regulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010.When Offered:  Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4230 - Environmental Economics: Develops a critical understanding of environmental issues and policy from an interdisciplinary economics perspective. Covers the economics of environmental quality including the links between the economy and the environment, the causes of environmental problems, evaluation of environmental projects and policies, and policies to address environmental issues with an emphasis on efficiency, equity, and sustainability, and the international dimensions of environmental issues.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1200 or permission of instructor. ECON 2010 recommended.When Offered:  Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4240 - Natural Resource Economics: Addresses the allocation of natural resources through applied study of fisheries, forestry, oil, minerals, water, and biodiversity resources. Mathematical analysis will be done using Microsoft Excel with Solver. Social and policy dynamics of allocation decisions will be explored through case studies. Field trips will address ecological and physical aspects of resource management. The intent is to develop a balanced perspective and tools to address resource management decisions across their diverse economic, social, and environmental dimensions. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered:  Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4250 - Economy, Technology, & Sustainability: This course explores the relationships between the economy and the material world.  It identifies the most critical challenges to sustainable economic development on local to global scales and ways of addressing them.  The course examines options surrounding material and energy flows, technological alternatives, livelihoods, consumption behavior, public policy, civil society institutions and social movements as avenues for meeting the major challenges to sustainability.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECON 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered:  Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4260 - Environmental and Resource Economics: Introduces students to the basic analytical approaches to environmental issues and natural resource use. Emphasis is on economic valuation and public policy. Covers traditional approaches based on assumptions of economic rationality and market efficiency as well as current approaches from the fields of environmental science behavioral economics. Emphasis is on active student participation and examination of current environmental controversies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  ECON 2010 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECON 6260; students cannot received credit for both.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4570 - Econometrics: This course is an introduction to econometric data analysis.  The statistical methods covered enable analysis of relationships between variables in data, with special attention to indentification of true casual effects.  Topics covered include linear and simple nonlinear regression models, internal and external validity, methods for panel data and binary dependent variables, instrumental variable methods, use of experiemntal and quasi-experimental data, and basic time series methods.  The course included hands-on data analysis and report writing. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2010 or equivalent, ECON 2010 or equivalent, and approved statistics course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECON 6560; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 4900 - Seminar in Economics: Discussion and analysis of selected topics in economic theory and of current economic issues. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisities: ECON 4570When Offered: Fall and Spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 2 to 4
ECON 4940 - Readings in Economics: Credit Hours: 3 to 4
ECON 4960 - Topics in Economics: Selected topics in economic analysis and problems to meet the special needs of upper-division students in various curricula throughout the Institute. This allows students to pursue more in-depth work in their areas of study.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECON 1200 and permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
ECON 6120 - Advanced Mathematical Methods in Economics: Mathematical techniques applied to theoretical models in economics.  Reviews and introduces core mathematical topics at the graduate economics level, applied to topics such as optimal behaviors of economics agents, equilibria among multiple interacting agents, economics growth processes and inter-temporal decision making, decision making in stochastic enviroments, and techniques to develop and work with economic models.  Assumes thorough knowledge of calculus and some familiarity with linear algebra and probability theory.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECON 4120; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6140 - Advanced Structure of Industry: An advanced analysis of current problems confronting major American industries, regulated and unregulated. Recent changes in growth patterns, market structures, and pricing policies are examined. Considerable emphasis is placed on emerging trends in technology and public policy, which are likely to affect significantly the future of these industries.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECON 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECON 4140; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6150 - Advanced Economics of Government Regulation: Can government intervention improve the performance of private markets and if so, when and how? How is regulatory policy actually made, and what effects has it had? These questions are applied to the experience in the U.S. and elsewhere with telecommunications, electricity, transportation, financial services, job safety, health, and environmental regulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6160 - Advanced Public Finance: Emphasis is placed on the analysis of efficient resource use in the public sector at the federal level. Expenditure theory and tax incidence are discussed. The effects of personal income, corporation, sales, payroll, and property taxes on resource allocation, equity, growth, and technological change are considered.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6190 - Advanced International Economics and Globalization: This course investigates the significance of economic globalization, covering the following topics: international trade and financial flows, technological innovation and intellectual property, technology transfer, national governments and transnational corporations, natural resources, health and the environment, impacts on selected industries and countries, and roles of the World Trade Organization and International Monetary Fund. The major controversies surrounding globalization are identified, and alternative arguments are evaluated based on available evidence.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6210 - Advanced Cost-Benefit Analysis: The techniques necessary to appraise the economic desirability and private-sector impact of various public projects and policies are studied. Concepts such as discounting, capital rationing, project selection, shadow pricing, risk assessment, unpriced goods, and economic surplus are developed. Among the topics from which illustrative case studies are drawn are urban and transport planning, energy, water resources, government regulation, and the environment. Suitable for graduate students in professional programs.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 6490 or ECON 2010.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6230 - Advanced Environmental Economics: Develops a critical understanding of environmental issues and policy and the environmental economics literature. Covers the economics of environmental quality including the links between the economy and the environment, the causes of environmental problems, evaluation of environmental projects and policies, and policies to address environmental issues with an emphasis on efficiency, equity, and sustainability, and the international dimensions of environmental issues.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6240 - Advanced Natural Resource Economics: Addresses the allocation of natural resources through applied study of fisheries, forestry, oil, minerals, water, and biodiversity resources. Mathematical analysis will be done using Microsoft Excel with Solver. Social and policy dynamics of allocation decisions will be explored through case studies. Field trips will address ecological and physical aspects of resource management. The intent is to develop a balanced perspective and tools to address resource management decisions across their diverse economic, social, and environmental dimensions.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6250 - Advanced Economy, Technology, and Sustainability: This course explores the relationships between the economy and the material world. It identifies the most critical challenges to sustainable economic development on local to global scales and ways of addressing them. The course examines options surrounding material and energy flows, technological alternatives, livelihoods, consumption behavior, public policy, civil society institutions, and social movements as avenues for meeting the major challenges to sustainability.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 1200 or permission of instructor; graduate student status.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECON 4250; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6260 - Advanced Environmental and Resource Economics: Develops a critical understanding of environmental and natural resource issues and policy and the environmental and natural resource economics literature. Covers the economics of environmental quality and natural resources including the links between the economy and the environment, the causes of environmental problems, the economics of resource exploitation, environmental and resource project evaluation, and policies to address environmental and resource issues. Emphasizes efficiency, equity, sustainability, and international dimensions of the issues.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECON 4260; students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6490 - Introduction to Economic Theory: The course examines the basic concepts and techniques of economic analysis and their applications to economics problems at the level of the firm, industry, and economy as a whole. Topics include theory of product and factor pricing, national income and employment theory, monetary and fiscal theories, economic growth and fluctuations.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6550 - Advanced Microeconomic Analysis: The central propositions of contemporary economic analysis are set forth. Topics include interaction of firms and households; determination through the market of resource allocation, outputs, prices, and incomes; capital and interest; theories of general equilibrium; static and dynamic models.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2010 or ECON 6490 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6560 - Introduction to Econometrics: This course is an introduction to econometric data analysis. The statistical methods covered enable analysis of relationships between variables in data, with special attention to identification of true causal effects. Topics covered include linear and simple nonlinear regression models, internal and external validity, methods for panel data and binary dependent variables, instrumental variables methods, use of experimental and quasi-experimental data, and basic time series methods. The course includes hands-on data analysis and report writing.
ECON 6570 - Advanced Econometrics: Application of statistical and mathematical techniques to analyze economic data. The formulation and interpretation of mathematical models that involve quantifiable economic relationships. The role of probability theory and statistical inference in the solution of model systems. Small-sample and asymptotic OLS regression, instrumental variables and GMM, multi-equation systems, panel data analysis, and maximum likelihood estimation including for binary, censored, and truncated dependent variables. Some mathematical facility is assumed.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6580 - Topics in Applied Econometrics: Applications of advanced econometric techniques such as two-and three-stage least squares, maximum likelihood, seemingly unrelated regression, full information likelihood, distributed lags, and autocorrelation correction to a variety of business and economic problems, including the capital asset pricing model, learning curve, economies of scale, hedonic price indexes, investment, production, and limited dependent variable models.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 6570 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6590 - Advanced Macroeconomic Analysis: This course examines theory of national income determination, the role of monetary and nonmonetary factors in our economic system as described by various schools of macroeconomics. Alternative perspectives on monetary and fiscal policies are critically examined.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECON 2020 or ECON 6490 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6600 - Seminar in Ecological Economics, Values, and Policy: This seminar in the Ecological Economics, Values, and Policy Professional Masters Program surveys the theories, methods, and world views of the approaches of ecological economics and science and technology studies to social scientific and humanistic environmental inquiry. Topics include: valuation, social construction, market failure, cultural studies, externalities, environmental policy and politics, Pareto optimality, and environmental ethics and philosophy.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6650 - Ecological Economics Values and Policy Professional Projects: This seminar focuses on the development of practical proposals for responding to environmental problems and opportunities. Research projects will include both primary data collection and the formulation of policy recommendations. Course readings will focus on case studies that involve disputes over environmental and economic issues, providing the basis for class discussion about how such disputes can be documented, analyzed, and resolved through various scientific, legal, managerial, and policy initiatives.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: EEVP Professional Masters students or permission of instructor.When Offered:  Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6940 - Readings in Economics: Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6960 - Topics in Economic Theory: Selected topics in economic analysis and problems to meet the special needs of graduate students in various curricula throughout the Institute. This allows students to pursue more in-depth work in their areas of study.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECON 2010 and permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECON 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A,B,C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
ECON 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ECON 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Up to 30
ECSE 1010 - Introduction to Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering: An experiment-centric development of the basic analysis tools of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering, emphasizing the concepts and mathematics of analog and digital circuits and electronics, programming, data generation and analysis, and system model development using paper and pencil analysis, simulation, and experiment. Problems, applications, and projects are chosen to lay a solid foundation for core EE and CSE courses.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ECSE 1090 - Introduction to Mechatronics Hardware and SoftwareA laboratory introduction to simulation and hardware programming with MATLAB and Simulink. Course covers: fundamental theory and programming tools for common sensors and actuators: gyroscopes, accelerometers, magnetometers, encoders, analog sensors, DC Motors, and motor drivers. Including:  discretization, sampling, integration, differentiation, delays, saturation, and control. Material covered in a hands on, observable, and application specific way. Weekly 1-hour lab/lectures introduce basic topics. Labs reinforce covered topics and are performed at home with provided hardware kits.
ECSE 2010 - Electric Circuits: Techniques for the analysis and simulation of linear electric circuits and measurements of their properties. Topics include resistive and energy-storage elements, controlled sources and operational amplifiers, systematic analysis methods, AC steady state, power and three-phase systems, magnetic coupling and transformers, transients, s-plane representation and analysis, frequency response, and Laplace transform and computer-aided methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2400 and PHYS 1200.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
ECSE 2050 - Introduction to Electronics: The physics and operation of semiconductor diodes, bipolar junction transistors, and field-effect transistors in elementary analog circuits. Non-ideal operational amplifier characteristics. Amplifier biasing, small-signal analysis, and frequency response. Elementary bipolar and MOSFET digital circuits.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2010.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
ECSE 2100 - Fields and Waves I: Development and application of Maxwell’s equations in free space and within materials. Introduction to vector calculus and computer-aided analysis and design methods in electromagnetics. Applications include calculation of lumped circuit elements from field theory, plane wave propagation in various materials, and reflection from boundaries. Transmission line concepts, Smith charts, and other design tools for distributed circuits.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2010 and MATH 2010.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
ECSE 2110 - Electrical Energy Systems: This course introduces the major components of todays power system such as transformers, electric machines, and transmission lines. Renewable energy sources and systems are discussed, including wind and solar energy. Integration of energy sources with the grid is addressed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2010, Corequisite: ECSE 2100.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 2210 - Microelectronics Technology: An introductory survey of microelectronics technology emphasizing physical properties of semiconductors, device and circuit fabrication, semiconductor device operation. Topics include semiconductor crystals; energy bands; electrons  and holes; dopant impurities; fabrication and operation of diodes, bipolar junction transistors, and field-effect transistors.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisites: ECSE 2050 and either ECSE 2100 or PHYS 4210.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 4
ECSE 2410 - Signals and SystemsTime and frequency-domain representation of continuous- and discrete-time signals and systems. Response of linear, time-invariant systems. Convolution, Fourier series, Fourier transform, Laplace transform, and z-transform. Applications in communication, feedback control, and filtering.
ECSE 2500 - Engineering Probability: Axioms of probability, joint and conditional probability, random variables, probability density, mass, and distribution functions, functions of one and two random variables, characteristic functions, sequences of independent random variables, central limit theorem, and laws of large numbers. Applications to electrical and computer engineering problems.<span style="font-size:10pt;font-family:'Times New Roman', serif;color:rgb(0,0,0);">



ECSE 2610 - Computer Components and Operations: Design-oriented introduction to computer components and operations. Standard codes, number systems, base conversions, and computer arithmetic. Boolean algebra, minimization and synthesis techniques for combinational and sequential logic. Races, hazards, and asynchronous behavior. Registers, arithmetic logic units, memory structure, buses, and control units. Machine language programming, instruction fetch and execution, input-output devices, interrupts, and microprogram sequencers. Software and hardware tools.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 1100. Corequisite: ENGR 2350.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
ECSE 2660 - Computer Architecture, Networks, and Operating Systems: Quantitative basis of modern computer architecture, processor design, memory hierarchy, and input/output methods. Layered operating system structures, process and storage management. Layered network organization, network protocols, switching, local and wide area networks. Examples from Unix and the Internet.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2610.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
ECSE 2900 - ECSE Enrichment Seminar: This seminar course addresses a range of issues involving engineering and public policy, innovation systems and economic development, and the National Academys Engineering Grand Challenges for the 21st Century.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ECSE 4030 - Analog IC Design: The modeling, analysis, and design of analog integrated circuits using CMOS technology. Topics include basic integrated circuit components, basic amplifier stages, operational amplifiers, frequency compensation and stability, and bandgap references. Emphasis is placed on the design of the fundamental circuits required for analog signal processing. Students undertake several design projects, including a sizeable project that comprises a significant percentage of the final grade.
ECSE 4040 - Digital Electronics: Analysis and design of switching-mode circuits: NMOS, CMOS, RTL, DTL, TTL, and ECL digital-logic families. Topics include: basic logic gates (voltage-transfer characteristics, noise margin, fan out, propagation delay, power dissipation), flip flops, Schmitt triggers, oscillators, timers, memories, A/D and D/A converters, and optional advanced topics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2050 and ECSE 2610.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5 contact hours
ECSE 4050 - Advanced Electronic Circuits: Linear and non-linear applications of operational amplifiers, with an emphasis on circuit design. Non-ideal operational amplifier behavior, including both static and dynamic characteristics. Amplifier stability and frequency compensation techniques. Operational amplifier based oscillators. Circuit noise.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2050.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 6050. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 6050.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4080 - Semiconductor Power Electronics: The application of power semiconductor devices to the efficient conversion of electrical energy. Circuit analysis, signal analysis, and energy concepts are integrated to develop steady-state and dynamic models of generic power converters. Specific topics include AC/DC conversion, DC/DC conversion, DC/AC conversion, and AC/AC conversion. These generic converters are applied as controlled rectifiers, switching power supplies, motor drives, HVDC transmission, induction heating, and others. Ancillary circuits needed for the proper operation and control of power semiconductor devices are also discussed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2050.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4090 - Mechatronics: The synergistic combination of mechanical engineering, electronics, control engineering, and computer science in the design process. The key areas of mechatronics studied in depth are control sensors and actuators, interfacing sensors and actuators to a microcomputer, discrete controller design, and real-time programming for control using the C programming language. The unifying theme for this heavily laboratory-based course is the integration of the key areas into a successful mechatronic design.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2350, ECSE 2410, and senior standing.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 4490. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and MANE 4490.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5 contact hours
ECSE 4110 - Power Engineering AnalysisAC steady-state analysis, three-phase networks, and complex power (brief review). Per-unit system. Practical transformer equivalent circuits. AC power transmission-lines: parameters; equivalent circuits; and steady-state operation. Power flow with transfer limits in balanced three-phase systems. Network power flow problem with solution by numerical methods. Symmetrical components: analysis including sequence networks for three-phase systems. Fault analysis.
ECSE 4120 - Electromechanics: This course studies electromechanical interactions in lumped-parameter systems. These interactions describe the operation of electric machines, electromechanical actuators, and transducers. The fundamental laws of Faraday, Ampere, and Gauss are considered to develop physical models of magnetic circuits, including those which use permanent magnets. These models are then expanded to include equations of motion and the thermodynamics of electromechanical coupling. Applications include transformers, induction machines, synchronous machines, DC machines, and reluctance machines.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2110.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4130 - EPE Laboratory: A laboratory based examination of static and rotating energy conversion equipment. Topics include the experimental study of the physical phenomena and characteristics of magnetic circuits, transformers, electric machines, rectifiers, DC/DC converters, and inverters. The interaction between static power converters and electric machines is emphasized.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4120 or ECSE 4080 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ECSE 4160 - Fields and Waves II: A continuation of ECSE 2100. Topics include solution of boundary value problems in electromagnetics using both analytic and numerical techniques. Conducting and dielectric guiding structures for waves. Radiation from simple antennas. Low frequency applications.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2100, ECSE 2050, MATH 4600.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4180 - Industrial Power System Design: Industrial power system design considerations: planning (safety, reliability, simplicity, maintenance, flexibility, cost), voltages (control, selection, effects of variation), protection (devices, limitations, requirements, coordination, testing), fault calculations, grounding (static and lightning protection, earth connections), power factor control and effects, switching and voltage transformation, instruments and meters, cable construction and installation, busways.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2110.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4220 - VLSI DesignIntroduction to VLSI design. The fabrication, device, circuit, and system aspects of VLSI design are covered in an integrated fashion. Emphasis is placed on NMOS and CMOS technology. Laboratory experiments focus on layout analysis, computer-aided layout, and logic and timing simulation. Project on digital design with standard cells.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2050 and ECSE 2610; ECSE 2210 recommended.
ECSE 4250 - Integrated Circuit Processes and Design: The theoretical and practical aspects of techniques utilized in the fabrication of silicon-based microcircuits. Imperfections in semiconductors, crystal growth, solid solubility, alloying and diffusion, ion implantation, oxide masking, epitaxy, metallization, etching, and photolithography. Fabrication techniques for bipolar and MOS-microcircuits, and the electrical performance of devices based on these techniques. Microcircuit design and layout. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and MTLE 4160.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2210.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4320 - Plasma Engineering: Introduction to plasma physics with primary emphasis on the application of plasmas for controlled thermonuclear fusion. Plasma behavior and confinement concepts are analyzed from both single-particle and conducting-fluid models. The interaction of electromagnetic waves with plasmas, plasma transport, plasma stability, and a review of major fusion-oriented devices are also presented.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2100.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4440 - Control Systems Engineering: Application of linear feedback theory to the design of large-scale, integrated control systems. Derivation of complex mathematical models of physical systems. Synthesis of appropriate control laws to provide stability. Simulation of complex control systems on digital computers.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2410.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4480 - Robotics I: A survey of the fundamental issues necessary for the design, analysis, control, and implementation of robotic systems. The mathematical description of robot manipulators in terms of kinematics and dynamics. Hardware components of a typical robot arm. Path following, control, and sensing. Examples of several currently available manipulators.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2400 and either MATH 2010 or ENGR 1100.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 6470, CSCI 4480, MANE 4120, and MANE 6120.  Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 6470, CSCI 4480, MANE 4120, or MANE 6120.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4490 - Robotics II: This course introduces methods that leverage the basic analysis techniques learned in Robotics I to develop numerical and algorithmic techniques needed to endow robots with the intelligence to devise strategies to solve problems they will encounter. Once these abilities are sufficiently well developed, robots will become safe and autonomous, thus paving the way for pervasive personal robots. Topics include: configuration space representation, cell decomposition, roadmap methods, rapidly-exploring random trees, simultaneous localization and mapping, contact modeling, grasping, and dexterous manipulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4480 or CSCI 4480.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE  6490, CSCI  4490 and CSCI 6490. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 6490, CSCI 4490, or CSCI 6490.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4500 - Distributed Systems and Sensor Networks: Recent developments in systems, sensors, communications, and networking technologies enable the development of large-scale distributed systems incorporating many individual nodes. This course takes an algorithmic approach to distributed systems for sensor fusion, localization and tracking, distributed robotics and sensor-based control. It also presents the basic principles of sensor node architectures and wireless sensor networks. Applications include environmental monitoring, biomedical systems, and security-related tracking problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2410.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 6500.  Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 6500.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 3
ECSE 4510 - Digital Control Systems
ECSE 4520 - Communication SystemsAn introduction to analog and digital communication signals and systems. Representation of analog and digital signals and their spectra. Baseband pulse and digital signaling, including PAM, PCM, DM, and DPCM. Bandlimited signaling without inter-symbol interference. Analog and digital bandpass signaling, including AM, FM, PM, OOK, PSK, FSK, MSK, QAM, and OFDM. Transmitter and receiver operations and systems. Performance in the presence of noise.
ECSE 4530 - Digital Signal Processing: This course provides a comprehensive treatment of the theory, design, and implementation of digital signal processing algorithms. The first half of the course emphasizes frequency-domain and Z-transform analysis. The second half of the course investigates advanced topics in signal processing, including FFT algorithms, multi-rate signal processing, filter design, adaptive filtering, and quantizer design. The course provides a strong theoretical foundation for future study in communications, control, or image processing.<span style="font-size:10pt;">
ECSE 4540 - Introduction to Image Processing: An introduction to the field of image processing, covering both analytical and implementation aspects. Topics include the human visual system, cameras and image formation, image sampling and quantization, spatial- and frequency-domain image enhancement, filter design, image restoration, image coding and compression, morphological image processing, color image processing, image segmentation, and image reconstruction. Real-world examples and assignments drawn from consumer digital imaging, security and surveillance, and medical image processing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4530 and MATH 2010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4560 - Digital Communications: An introduction to digital communications, including signal generation, signal detection, synchronization, channel modeling, and coding. Baseband pulse modulation. Signal space representation of signals and optimal receiver structures.Bandpass modulation techniques including PSK, QAM and FSK.Carrier, symbol, and frame synchronization.Channel characterization and modeling, including terrestrial channels.Error control coding.<span style="font-size:10pt">Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 4520 and ECSE 2500.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 6560. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 6560.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4630 - Lasers and Optical Systems: Optical physics and applications of lasers. Design of optical systems. Topics include: wave optics and beam propagation, Gaussian beams, resonators, optical properties of atoms and laser gain media, laser amplifiers, pulsed laser systems, applications of lasers, nonlinear optics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2620 recommended.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PHYS 4630. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and PHYS 4630.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4640 - Optical Communications and Integrated Optics: Phenomena, materials, and devices for optical communications and computing. Topics include: guided wave and fiber optics, integrated optics, electro-optic and nonlinear optical switching, pulse and soliton propagation, sources, and detectors.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2620.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PHYS 4640. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and PHYS 4640.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 3 lecture hours and 3 laboratory hours per week.
ECSE 4670 - Computer Communication Networks: Introduction to the basic concepts of computer and communication networks, like flow control, congestion control, end-to-end reliability, routing,framing, error-recovery, multiple access, and statistical multiplexing.In-depth presentation of the different networking layers, with emphasis on the Internet reference model. Protocols and architectures such as TCP, IP, Ethernet, wireless networks, etc. are described in order to illustrate important networking concepts. Introduction to quantitiative analysis and modeling of networks.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2610 and basic probability such as in MATH 2800, ENGR 2600 or ECSE 2500.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4720 - Solid-State Physics: An introduction to theoretical and experimental solidstate physics. Wave mechanics in the perfect crystal. X-rays, electrons, and phonons. Electrical properties of metals and semiconductors. Qualitative treatment of lattice defects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2220 or equivalent. When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PHYS 4720. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and PHYS 4720.Credit Hours: 4
ECSE 4740 - Applied Parallel Computing for Engineers: Engineering techniques for parallel processing. Knowledge and hands-on experience in developing applications software for processors on inexpensive widely-available computers with massively parallel computing resources. Multi-thread shared memory programming with OpenMP and NVIDIA GPU multicore programming with CUDA and Thrust. The use of NVIDIA gaming and graphics cards on current laptops and desktops for general purpose parallel computing using Linux.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2660 or equivalent, knowledge of C++.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4750 - Computer Graphics: Introduction to Interactive Computer Graphics, with an emphasis on applications programming. Objects and viewers, and the synthetic camera model. Graphics architectures, the graphics pipeline, clipping, rasterization, and programmable shaders. Input and interaction. Geometric objects, homogeneous coordinates, and transformations. Viewing, hidden surface removal, frame and depth buffers, compositing, and anti-aliasing. Shading, light and materials, texture mapping, ray tracing, and radiosity. Intellectual property concerns. Extensive programming with the OpenGL API and C++.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2610 or CSCI 2500 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4760 - Real-Time Applications in Control and Communications: Experiments and lectures demonstrate the design and use of microcomputers as both decision tools and on-line real-time system components in control and communications. Topics include the basic operations of microcomputers, data I/O, analog and digital process control, voice processing, digital filter design, digital communication, and optimal LQR control.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 4530 and one of ECSE 4510, ECSE 4520 or ECSE 4440.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5 contact hours
ECSE 4770 - Computer Hardware Design: Digital design methodologies including timing chain and counter based hardwired microprogram design, modules, and modular design. The course bridges LSI and MSI design treating microprocessors, and I/O interfacing. Bus protocol standards, interrupts, direct memory access, priority arbitration, asynchronous timing, and overlap or double buffering. Specific examples of design include controllers for disks, cassettes, video systems, and stepping motors. Course includes a laboratory with access to FPGAs and microprocessors.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2610; ENGR 2350 desirable.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5 contact hours
ECSE 4780 - Advanced Computer Hardware Design: Design methodologies include register transfer modules and firmware microprogrammed design. “Bit-slice” philosophy of design. LSI microprocessors as design elements in larger digital systems such as high-speed channels and special purpose computers. Detailed discussion of the structure of several computers at the chip and board level. Specification of custom IC digital systems. FPGA based design implementation using VHDL. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 6700.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4770. Corequisite: ECSE 2660.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ECSE 4790 - Microprocessor Systems: Hardware and software for real-time microprocessor-based digital systems. Basic concepts and operations of on-chip components related to digital system functionality. Architectures, instructions sets, and interfacing with peripherals through serial or parallel ports. Introduction to 32-bit machines with in-depth treatment of 16- and 8-bit machines. Emphasis on C language cross-compilers. Laboratory exercises are included to demonstrate hardware and software development techniques practiced in industry.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2610 and ENGR 2350.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
ECSE 4800 - Subsurface Sensing and Imaging Systems: An introduction to the basics of subsurface sensing and imaging: Properties of probes such as optical beams, x-rays, ultrasonic waves, and electromagnetic waves. Physical interaction of probes with various media-transmission, reflection, attenuation, scattering, diffusion, fluorescence. Contrast agents and molecular sensing/imaging systems. Biomedical and security applications. Extracting information from subsurface signals using multi-view tomography (MVT), localized probing and mosaicing (LPM), and multi-spectral discrimination (MSD).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2410 and ECSE 2100. BMED 2800 or permission of instructor also required.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4810 - Introduction to Probabilistic Graphical Models: This course covers topics related to learning and inference with different types of Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGMs). It also demonstrates the application of PGMs to different fields. The course covers both directed and undirected graphical models, both parameter and structure learning, and both exact and approximated inference methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2500 or equivalent and proficiency in computer programming. Prior knowledge in pattern recognition or machine learning is a plus but is not required.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 6810.  Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 6810.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4900 - Multidisciplinary Capstone Design: A capstone design experience that engages students from biomedical, computer and systems, electrical, industrial, materials, and mechanical engineering on teams in an open-ended engineering design problem in preparation for professional practice. With the guidance of a multidisciplinary team of faculty members and instructional support staff, students apply knowledge and skills from prior coursework. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2050 and senior status.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: ISYE 4270, MTLE 4920 and MANE 4260.  Students cannot obtain credit for this course and ISYE 4270, MTLE 4920, MANE 4260.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 4940 - Independent Studies in Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering: Supervised reading and research.Credit Hours: 1 to 3
ECSE 4960 - Topics in Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering: Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6010 - Network Theory: The analysis of active and passive linear networks, including sensitivity, topological formulas, energy functions, positive real functions, and realizability conditions. The determination of input and transfer functions that approximate a prescribed response. Active circuit elements including negative converters, gyrators, and operational amplifiers.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2050.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6050 - Advanced Electronic Circuits
ECSE 6090 - Advanced Power Electronics: Advanced power electronic circuits and systems, as well as their modeling and control. Topics include advanced dc-dc converters, modeling by averaging and sampled-data methods, discontinuous conduction modes, linear and nonlinear current control methods and design, spectral and dynamic characteristics of pulse-width modulation, ac-dc converters with active power factor correction, resonant and soft-switching converters, and EMI filter design, as well as autonomous and distributed power systems. Course assignments include laboratory projects involving simulation, hardware design, and measurement.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4080 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6110 - Power Engineering AnalysisAC steady-state analysis, three-phase networks, and complex power (brief review). Per-unit system. Practical transformer equivalent circuits. AC power transmission-lines: parameters; equivalent circuits; and steady-state operation. Power flow with transfer limits in balanced three-phase systems. Network power flow problem with solution by numerical methods. Symmetrical components: analysis including sequence networks for three-phase systems. Fault analysis.
ECSE 6120 - Power Quality: Power quality examines the causes of and solutions to electric power quality problems. Topics range from utility issues such as voltage sags, swells, and outages to consumer issues, such as harmonic distortion, and bus reliability at the equipment level. Solution methods such as implementing surge suppressors, the UPS, active filtering, and proper grounding techniques will be discussed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 6160 or ECSE 4080 are recommended.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6130 - Protective Relaying: Basic relaying philosophy. Current and potential transformers. Operating principles of electromagnetic, electronic, and digital relays. Application of relays to protect generators, busses, transformers, and transmission lines.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: ECSE 6110.When Offered: Offered upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6140 - Power Generation Operation and Control: Economics of the operation of power systems. Control of hydro and thermal generating units. Aspects of interconnected operation. Transmission losses and techniques for optimum economic generation. Hydrothermal coordination problems. Modern power markets. State estimation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: ECSE 6110 or ECSE 4110 or equivalent.When Offered: Offered upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6150 - Electric and Magnetic Fields in Electric Power Engineering: Review of electromagnetic theory required to undertake analysis and design of power equipment. Experimental, analog, and digital field estimation techniques. Case studies in electric and magnetic fields such as cable and bushing design, problems of gas bus systems, electrostatic precipitation, magnetic flux penetration, eddy currents, losses, shielding, generation of torque.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4120 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6160 - Surge Phenomena in Electric Power Engineering: Analysis and computation of electrical transients in lumpy and distributed power circuits; switching surges, lightning surges, traveling waves. Impact of surges on terminal equipment. Insulation coordination; system protection; design of electric power apparatus and systems to operate reliably and economically in a transient environment.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6110.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6170 - Mechanical Aspects of Electric Power Apparatus: General theory of kinematics and dynamics of machines and structures with emphasis on power generating and distributing equipment. Special topics include basic concepts of vibration phenomena in mechanical systems, dynamic behavior of turbine-generator sets, self-excited vibrations in mechanical systems, earthquakes, circuit breaker linkages, short circuit forces on windings and bus structures.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2110 and ECSE 2410 or their equivalents.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6190 - Computer Methods in Electric Power Engineering: Applies the students knowledge of power engineering to the solution of large problems by computer methods. Treats matrix techniques, load-flow analysis, network building, short circuit studies, numerical integration, and finite element analysis as it applies to power systems and power apparatus.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6110 or ECSE 4110 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6200 - Semiconductor Device Characterization: This graduate-level course is designed to give students a hands-on experience in the characterization of basic semiconductor devices (diffused resistors, pn junction diodes, Schottky diodes, MOS capacitors, bipolar junction transistors, MOSFETs) in wafer and/or packaged forms.  The final project involves the students in a detailed characterization of devices in a specific application (e.g. high-voltage power electronics, submicron ULSI, microwave and wireless).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6230.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 3
ECSE 6210 - Advanced Device Concepts: An introduction to emerging electronic and optoelectronics technology. Topics cover cutting edge technologies and novel device concepts, such as quantum devices, silicon-on-insulators (SOI), compound semiconductor devices and technologies, thin film transistors (TFTs), wide band gap semiconductor devices and technologies, Si-Ge devices, solar cells, photodetectors, semiconductor lasers, opto-electronic ICs, optical interconnects, and display technologies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2210 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6220 - Physical Foundations of Solid-State Devices: Physical foundations underlying the operation of modern electronic and photonic solid-state devices. Quantum mechanical foundations are emphasized, including the postulates of quantum mechanics, wave-particle duality, uncertainty relation, the Kronig-Penney model, and perturbation theory. In addition, the course covers areas such as semiconductor statistics, doping, heterostructures, transport, and tunneling.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites ECSE 2210 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6230 - Semiconductor Devices and Models I: The physical operation of basic modern semiconductor devices and the determination of their internal parameters are discussed in detail. A review of semiconductor physics, including incomplete ionization, carrier lifetimes, and carrier transport, and solutions of continuity equation are presented. Devices include pn junction diodes, metal-oxide-semiconductor capacitors and field-effect transistors. Emphasis is placed on the fundamental mechanisms that contribute to device performance. The interrelationship between device parameters and circuit performance is also discussed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2210 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6240 - VLSI Fabrication Technology: Fabrication technology for silicon and gallium arsenide integrated circuits with emphasis on sub-micron structures. Topics include epitaxy, diffusion, binary and ternary phase diagrams, grown and deposited oxides and nitrides, polysilicon and silicide technology, single-and multi-metal systems, plasma and chemical etching, ion milling photo, e-beam and X-ray lithography.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4250 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6250 - Solid-State Microwave Devices: Physical properties of operation, modeling, and application of selected semiconductor microwave devices. Devices considered include varactors, p-i-n diodes, Schottky barrier diodes, avalanche transit time devices, transferred electron devices, and field effect transistors. Terminal behavior of these devices, their noise characteristics, and their use in microwave circuits.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: ECSE 6230.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6260 - Semiconductor Power Devices: Special problems of semiconductor devices operating at high voltage and high current levels. Devices include p-i-n and Schottky diodes, bipolar junction transistors, power MOSFETs and thyristors. Topics include space charge limited current flow, microplasmas, avalanche breakdown, junction termination, high-level injection, emitter crowding, double injection, second breakdown, triggering mechanisms, plasma propagation, switching and recovery characteristics. Introduction to the Insulated-Gate Bipolar Transistor.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 6230 and ECSE 6290 or basic knowledge (at the graduate level) of semiconductor devices or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6270 - Optoelectronics: A brief review of interaction of light with matter. Operating principles, basic designs, and applications of optoelectronic devices such as Light Emitting Diodes, Laser Diodes, Photodetectors, and Solar Cells. Electro-optic, Acousto-optic and Non-linear optic based optical components such as Modulators, Switches, Couplers, Multiplexers, and Amplifiers. Optical Waveguides and Fibers. Optoelectronic Applications such as Fiber Optic and Free Space Optical Communication, Photovoltaics, Thermophotovoltaics, and Solid State Lighting.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2210 and ECSE 4720 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6280 - Light Emitting Diodes: This course offers a comprehensive explanation of the technology and physics of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) such as infrared, visible-spectrum, ultraviolet, and white LEDs made from III–V semiconductors. The elementary properties of LEDs and material on device structure, packaging, reflectors, phosphor materials, light extraction, and junction temperature are discussed. Applications of the LED focus on illumination, fiber, and free-space communication.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6290 - Semiconductor Devices and Models II: A continuation of ECSE 6230. Physical operation and modeling of charge-coupled devices, junction field-effect transistors, bipolar junction transistors and heterojunction devices. Studies of heterojunction devices emphasize the exploitation of particular quantum-mechanical phenomena to achieve unique device behavior.
ECSE 6300 - Integrated Circuit Fabrication Laboratory: Theory and practice of IC fabrication in a research laboratory environment. Test chips are fabricated and the resulting devices and circuits evaluated. Processes and fabrication equipment studied and used include oxidation/diffusion, CVD reactors, photolithography, plasma etching, vacuum evaporator, ion implantation, etc. Instruments used in process monitoring and final testing include thin film profilometer, ellipsometer, resistivity probe, scanning electron microscope, capacitance-voltage system, etc. The fundamentals of hazardous material handling and clean room procedures are studied.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4250 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MTLE 6300. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and MTLE 6300.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6310 - Plasma Dynamics I: Analysis of the dynamics of plasma behavior in terms of statistical models. Development of the Boltzmann equation, the moment equations of continuity, momentum, and energy, and their application to plasma transport processes.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6320 - Plasma Dynamics II: Plasma kinetic theory, suitability of magnetically confined plasmas, plasma radiation, plasma turbulence.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6310.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6400 - Systems Analysis Techniques: Methods of analysis for continuous and discrete-time linear systems. Convolution, classical solution of dynamic equations, transforms, and matrices are reviewed. Emphasis is on the concept of state space. Linear spaces, concept of state, modes, controllability, observability, state transition matrix. State variable feedback, compensation, decoupling.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2410 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6600.  Students cannot receive credit for both this course and MANE 6600.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6420 - Nonlinear Control Systems: Phenomena peculiar to nonlinear systems. Linearization, iteration, and perturbation procedures. Describing function stability analysis. Phase plane methods. Relaxation oscillations and limit cycles. Stability analysis by Lyapunovs method. Popovs theorem. Adaptive control systems. Sensitivity analysis.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6400 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6430 - Optimization Methods: Linear programming, nonlinear programming, iterative methods, and dynamic programming are presented, especially as they relate to optimal control problems. Discrete and continuous optimal regulators are derived from dynamic programming approach, which also leads to the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman Equation and the Minimum Principle. Linear quadratic regulators, linear tracking problems, and output regulators are treated. Linear observer and the separation theorem are developed for feedback controller implementation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2410. Corequisite: ECSE 6400.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6440 - Optimal Control Theory: The concepts, techniques, and tools related to optimal control for dynamical systems. Major topics include calculus of variation, minimum principle, dynamic programming, optimal estimation, and differential games. Both discrete time systems and continuous times are addressed. Particular consideration is given to linear time invariant systems in terms of linear quadratic regulator and Kalman filter.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6400.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6460 - Multivariable Control Systems: Tools and methods for the analysis and design of linear multivariable feedback systems. Topics include the connection between frequency domain and state space models and methods, model identification, model reduction, model uncertainty and closed loop performance, convex analysis and design methods, optimal controller synthesis using H2, H-infinity, and structured singular value criteria.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6400.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6470 - Robotics IA survey of the fundamental issues necessary for the design, analysis, control, and implementation of robotic systems. The mathematical description of robot manipulators in terms of kinematics and dynamics. Hardware components of a typical robot arm. Path following, control, and sensing. Examples of several currently available manipulators.
ECSE 6480 - Adaptive Systems: This course contains the fundamental theory required to design adaptive systems. Topics include parameter identification, ARMA modeling, model reference systems, model algorithmic control, self-tuning systems, and adaptive filtering. Applications to physical and physiological systems are introduced.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6400 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6490 - Robotics II: This course introduces methods that leverage the basic analysis techniques learned in Robotics I to develop numerical and algorithmic techniques needed to endow robots with the intelligence to devise strategies to solve problems they will encounter. Once these abilities are sufficiently well developed, robots will become safe and autonomous, thus paving the way for pervasive personal robots. Topics include: configuration space representation, cell decomposition, roadmap methods, rapidly-exploring random trees, simultaneous localization and mapping, contact modeling, grasping, and dexterous manipulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4480 or CSCI 4480.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 4490, CSCI 4490, and CSCI 6490. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 4490, CSCI 4490, or CSCI 6490.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6500 - Distributed Systems and Sensor Networks: Recent developments in systems, sensors, communications, and networking technologies enable the development of large-scale distributed systems incorporating many individual nodes. This course takes an algorithmic approach to distributed systems for sensor fusion, localization and tracking, distributed robotics and sensor-based control. It also presents the basic principles of sensor node architectures and wireless sensor networks. Applications include environmental monitoring, biomedical systems, and security-related tracking problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2410 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 4500.  Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 4500.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 3
ECSE 6510 - Introduction to Stochastic Signals and Systems: Deterministic signal representations and analysis, introduction to random processes and spectral analysis, correlation function and power spectral density of stationary processes, noise mechanisms, the Gaussian and Poisson processes. Markov processes, the analysis of linear  and nonlinear systems with random inputs, stochastic signal representations, orthogonal expansions, the Karhunen-Loeve series, channel characterization, introduction to signal detection, linear mean-square filtering, the orthogonality principle, optimum Wiener and Kalman filtering, modulation theory, and systems analysis.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2410 and ECSE 2500 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6520 - Detection and Estimation Theory: Classical statistical decision theory, decision criteria, binary and composite hypothesis tests. Statistical models of signals and noise. Detection of known signals in Gaussian noise. Receiver operating characteristics and error probability. Applications to radar and communications. Detection of signals with unknown or random parameters, detection of stochastic signals, nonparametric detection techniques. Statistical estimation theory, performance measures. Cramer-Rao bounds, estimation of unknown signal parameters, optimum demodulation, signal design.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: Probability theory and ECSE 6510.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6530 - Information Theory and Coding: Information measures, characterization of information sources, coding for discrete sources, the noiseless coding theorems, construction of Huffman codes. Discrete channel characterization, channel capacity, noisy-channel coding theorems, reliability exponents. Various error-control coding and decoding techniques, including block and convolutional codes. Introduction to waveform channels and rate distortion theory.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: probability theory. Corequisite: ECSE 6510.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6550 - Stochastic Processes in Communication and Control: Review of measure and integration theory, elements of probability, random variables, conditional probability, and expectations. Stochastic processes, stationarity, and ergodicity. Gaussian processes and Brownian motion, the Poisson process. Markov processes, wide-sense stationary processes, spectral representations, linear prediction and filtering. Stochastic integrals and differential equations, white noise and the stochastic calculus, the Fokker-Planck equation, diffusion processes, recursive filtering and estimation, evaluation of likelihood ratios. Applications in communication, information processing, and control.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6510.When Offered: Fall term upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6560 - Digital Communications
ECSE 6570 - Digital Signal Compression: Data Compression in Theory and Practice: Principles of efficient digital representation of analog signals and their application to images, audio, and multimedia signals. Topics include rate-distortion theory, scalar and vector quantization, trellis-coded quantization (TCQ), entropy coding, Huffman coding, arithmetic coding, bit-plane coding, set partition coding, Ziv-Lempel coding, PCM, DPCM, transform coding, subband/wavelet coding, and tree/trellis coding. Certain standard or oft-used systems, evolving or current, such as JPEG, JPEG2000, JPEG-LS, Wavelet/TCQ, EZW, SPIHT, FBI Fingerprint, and MPEG will be treated.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 6510, ECSE 6530.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6580 - Theory of Digital Communications: Review of the discrete Gaussian noise channel and development of coding theorems. Waveform channels, orthonormal expansions of signals and Gaussian noise, the vector model of waveform channels, time-bandwidth and dimensionality, optimum receiver principles, channel capacity and reliability functions, signal design and selection. Coding for the Gaussian noise channel, theoretical performance bounds, implementation of error control coding, techniques for overall system evaluation, investigation of fundamental rate versus reliability tradeoffs.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6510.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6590 - Principles of Wireless Communications: A comprehensive description of the concepts used in modern wireless and cellular systems. The general topics covered will be wireless channel models, multi-access issues, such as FDMA/TDMA and CDMA with a brief view of GSM, descriptions of digital transmission methods in wireless, receiver diversity, channel estimation and multi-user detection, and wideband communications. The topics of system capacity and the effects of automatic power control, wireless networks, and DSP applications for wireless will be addressed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 6510 and ECSE 6560.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6600 - Internet Protocols: This course will cover concepts and protocols which enable heterogeneous computer networks to work with each other, including transport (TCP, UDP), network (IP, IPng), routing (RIP, OSPF), network management (SNMP, SNMPv2, RMON), and other important protocols like ARP, ICMP, DNS, BOOTP, DHCP, and HTTP. Advanced topics like Mobile IP, Real-time and reservation protocols (RTP, RSVP), IP multicast (IGMP, MBONE) and network security will also be examined. Emphasis will be on breadth of coverage, as well as hands-on programming experiences.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4670.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6610 - Pattern Recognition: Structure of pattern classification problems. Mathematics of statistical decision theory: random vectors, multivariate probability functions, discriminants, parametric and nonparametric techniques, Bayesian and maximum likelihood estimation, feature selection, dimensionality reduction, whitening transformations. Adaptive methods and clustering. Five programming assignments and a term paper.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2500 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6620 - Digital Signal Processing: A comprehensive treatment of the theory, design, and implementation of digital signal processing structures. The sampling, quantization, and reconstruction process. Design of digital filters in both the time and frequency domains. Analysis of finite word length effects. Theory and applications of discrete Fourier transforms and the FFT algorithm. Applications from the communication, control, and radar signal processing areas.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  ECSE 2500,  ECSE 4510.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6630 - Digital Image and Video Processing: Theory of multidimensional signal processing and its application to digital image and video processing. The first half will cover signals and systems, Fourier transform, z-transform, discrete Fourier transform, FIR and IIR filters and their design. The emphasis will be on the unexpected and important differences from the one-dimensional case. The second half consists of applications in image and video signal processing, e.g., compression coding, noise reduction, motion estimation, deblurring, and restoration.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6620.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6640 - Digital Picture Processing: Practice of picture processing with emphasis on the differences between techniques appropriate for symbolic and natural images. Image acquisition: digitization, coding, photometric and geometric transformations. Image processing: morphology, registration and differencing. Image interpretation: color, size, distance, directionality, layout, connectivity, and shape. File formats, document compression, image processing languages and software. Applications to documents, remote sensing, and biomedicine.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: prior exposure to probability, stochastic processes, and assembler language programming is recommended but not required.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6650 - Computer Vision: Image formation and visual perception. Images, line structures, and line drawings. Preprocessing, boundary detection, texture, and region growing. Image representation in terms of boundaries, regions, and shape. Three-dimensional structures and their projections. Analysis, manipulation, and classification of image data. Knowledge-based approaches to image understanding. Applications from fields of robot vision, biomedical-image analysis, and satellite and aerial image interpretation.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6660 - Broadband and Optical Networking: Review of fundamental concepts and protocols of broadband and optical networking. Convergence of telephone, Internet, and cable networks lead to new architectural and protocol concepts. Concepts and architectures covered in this course include: high-speed switching and router-design, traffic engineering, fiber optical communications, optical networking concepts, protection/restoration/survivability, optical link layers, quality of service, and broadband last-mile technologies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4670.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6670 - Local Computer Networks and Multiaccess Communication: Review of OSI and IEEE 802 layered network architectures. Related queuing theory including basic  Markov chain theory; M/M/1 and M/G/1 queues; and  reservation, polling, and token passing systems. Protocols for multiple access channels such as satellite and packet radio networks including ALOHA and carrier sensing protocols. Local area network protocols: CSMA/CD, token passing rings and buses, implicit token protocols, and protocols for fiber optic LANs. Emphasis throughout on access protocols and their analysis.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2500, ECSE 4670.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6680 - Advanced VLSI Design: Introduction to VLSI architecture design approaches and methodologies for digital signal processing systems, digital memory circuits and architectures, and computer VLSI arithmetic. Topics include: pipelining, parallel processing, timing and clocking, systolic architectures, digital filter architectures, Viterbi decoder architectures, SRAM, DRAM, flash memory, high-speed adder and multiplier architectures. Laboratory experiments involve the use of commercial EDA tools with hardware description language (HDL).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4220.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6690 - VLSI Design Automation: Software design aids for specifying IC design. Covers a spectrum of logic entry, simulation, placement, routing, network extraction, verification, PG tape generation, and testing. Use of a tool set for 2 micron CMOS gate array design using an industrial foundry. Designs are actually fabricated.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 4770, ECSE 6700.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6700 - Computer Architecture Prototyping with FPGA’s: An advanced design and laboratory course. Design methodologies include register transfer modules and firmware microprogrammed design. Advanced microprocessor topics. Bit-slice philosophy of design. LSI microprocessors as design elements in larger digital systems such as high-speed channels and special purpose computers. Detailed discussion of the structure of several computers at the chip and board level. Emphasis on high-speed ECL and Schottky circuits. Specification of custom IC digital systems. FPGA based design implementation using VHDL. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 4780.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 4770.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6710 - Fuzzy Sets and Expert Systems: Introduction to fuzzy set theory and fuzzy logics: basic concepts, fuzzy logics operations. Semantic manipulation applied to case studies in approximate reasoning, linguistic modeling, decision theory, and cluster analysis. Expert systems architecture and applications. Symbolic manipulation knowledge representation, control structure, and explanation capabilities. Analysis of expert systems such as MYCIN, PROSPECTOR, OPS5, DELTA.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: Expertise in a high-level programming language, some knowledge of probability.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6720 - Neural Network Computing: The theoretical background for learning using neural networks and important issues in the applications of neural networks. Topics include perception, associative memory, multilayer networks, recurrent networks, learning and generalization capabilities, training algorithms, learning with prior knowledge, and examples in applications.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: Familiarity with probability theory, linear algebra, and FORTRAN or C programming.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6730 - Fault-Tolerant Digital Systems: Theory and techniques for the diagnosis of hardware faults in digital systems and the design of fault-tolerant systems. Fault detection and diagnosis in logic networks. Static and dynamic redundancy to achieve error detection and error correction.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2610.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6750 - Finite-State Machine Theory: Topics vary from year to year and may include methods of representation for finite-state machines, state assignments, machine decomposition theory. Experiments on finite-state machines, finite-memory machines, information-lossless machines. Linear machines, probabilistic machines, cellular arrays.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2610 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6770 - Software Engineering I: Engineering approach to the development of small and large programming projects. The life cycle steps of project planning, requirements analysis and specification, design, production, testing, and maintenance of programming systems. Examples from current literature. Use of Unix workstations and a team project with object-oriented analysis are required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2660 and CSCI 2300 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6780 - Software Engineering II: Continuation of ECSE 6770. Current techniques in software engineering with topics selected from economics, reusability, reliable software, program analysis, reverse engineering, CASE tools, automatic code generation, and project management techniques.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6770.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6790 - Computational Geometry: Literature survey of current research in computational geometry and theoretical computer graphics showing recent efficient algorithms useful in graphics and CAD. Algorithms such as Voronoi networks, geometric searching, convex hulls, divide and conquer in multidimensional space, repeated rotation, preprocessing scenes to draw back to front from any viewpoint, new hidden surface algorithms, haloed line elimination, polyhedron intersection, and algorithms for scenes with thousands of faces are discussed. Major research paper required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 4750 and CSCI 2300 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6800 - Advanced 3-D Computer Graphics and Visualization: This course will cover 3-D graphical application programmer interfaces (APIs) and advanced rendering techniques, visulation pipelines, creating simulations, and visualization packages. Also covered will be algorithms for extracting visual information from data sets, such as determining iso-surfaces, contours, and cut planes. A programming emphasis will be on object-oriented design and systems. Term project required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 4750, CSCI 2300 or equivalent, some familiarity with Java/C++.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3



ECSE 6810 - Introduction to Probabilistic Graphical Models: This course covers topics related to learning and inference with different types of Probabilistic Graphical Models (PGMs). It also demonstrates the application of PGMs to different fields. The course covers both directed and undirected graphical models, both parameter and structure learning, and both exact and approximated inference methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ECSE 2500 or equivalent and proficiency in computer programming. Prior knowledge in pattern recognition or machine learning is a plus but is not required.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 4810.  Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 4810.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6820 - Queuing Systems and Applications: A course on fundamentals of stochastic processes and queuing theory emphasizing applications. Poisson processes, renewal processes, Markov chains, general methods in the study of Markovian and non-Markovian systems, tandem queues, networks of queues, priority and bulk queues, computational methods, and simulation. Focus of the course is the application of these tools in the performance evaluation and design of computer systems, communication networks, manufacturing systems, and service systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2500 or MATP 4600.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ISYE 6820. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ISYE 6820.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6830 - Large-Scale Systems: Case Studies and Analyses: A case-study approach introducing the systems method to analyze large-scale systems. Qualitative and quantitative study of the problems, from problem examination, to problem definition, to problem solution, and to implementation. Case studies in manufacturing, transportation, community development, water resources, and criminal justice. Emphasis is on analysis of real-world problems, using techniques of systems engineering and operations research, and considering diverse factors such as economic, technical, sociological, and environmental issues.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2500. Corequisite: MATP 4700 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6840 - Modeling Large-Scale Systems: Applications of operations research and systems analysis techniques to mathematical modeling of complex systems, especially large-scale public systems. Discussion of model-building approaches, emphasizing the role of creativity, rationality, and mathematics. Introduction of important quantitative techniques (e.g., geometrical probability, optimization theory, and stochastic processes) and their application to modeling emergency service systems, spatial distribution of public service facilities, congestion, land-use patterns, transportation systems, demographics, and energy.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATP 4700 and ECSE 2500 (or equivalent); ECSE 6830 desirable.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ISYE 6840. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ISYE 6840.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6860 - Evaluation Methods for Decision Making: Evaluation provides structured information for policy-relevant decision making based on a purposeful analysis of the identified measures. Topics include test hypotheses, randomization/control schemes, measures framework, measurement methods, and pertinent analytic techniques. Emphasis is on the application of evaluation methods (including systems engineering and operations research techniques) to issues arising in criminal justice, education, health, housing, transportation, welfare, automated information systems, and military programs.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2500 or MATP 4600 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6900 - Seminar in Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering: Credit Hours: to be arranged
ECSE 6910 - Seminar in Electric Power Engineering: Credit Hours: 0
ECSE 6940 - Readings in Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering: Supervised reading and problems, by individual arrangement.Credit Hours: 1 to 3
ECSE 6960 - Topics in Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering: New or special courses are presented under this listing from time to time.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
ECSE 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 3 to 9
ECSE 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 6 to 9
ECSE 7010 - Optical Fiber Communications: Review of the state of the art in optical fibers, light sources, and photodetectors. Topics include: propagation, coupling, dispersion, loss and cut-off characteristics of guided wave models in optical fibers, structural and operating parameters of various types of hetrostructure lasers and light-emitting diodes and quantum efficiency, response time and noise characteristics of silicon PAD and PIN diodes. Also includes applications of optical fibers in optical communications, in data processing, and in control systems.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 7020 - Digital Control and Estimation: Computer control and estimation algorithms including deterministic and stochastic models. Markov sequence and Bayes decision rules, linear Kalman filtering, predicting, and smoothing. Parameter identification, combined state and parameter estimation. Adaptive filters and on-line rapid estimation schemes, extended and nonlinear filters. Optimal digital control of deterministic and stochastic systems. Separation theorems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 6400.When Offered: Offered upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 7100 - Real-Time Programming and Applications: Hardware and software characteristics of real-time systems for analysis and control. Real-time programming techniques, standard interfaces and busses, sensors, data smoothing, digital filtering, and digital control.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ECSE 9990 - Dissertation:
ENGR 1010 - Professional Development I: An introduction to the issues related to working in team settings. Topics explored include: communications in teams, public speaking and self awareness, stages of group development, building a team, group decision making, and conflict resolution. The course format will include small and large group discussions, case studies, experiential exercises, and regular participation from industry guests.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ENGR 1100 - Introduction to Engineering Analysis: An integrated development of linear algebra and statics emphasizing engineering applications and also incorporating computer exercises involving matrix techniques and calculations using available software packages.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENGR 1200 - Engineering Graphics and CAD: An introduction to the techniques for creating solid models of engineering designs. Topics include three-dimensional modeling of parts and assemblies, visualization, orthographic and isometric free-hand sketching, and computer-generated design documentation.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 1Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 3 contact hours
ENGR 1300 - Engineering Processes: The use of basic machine tools such as lathes, milling machines, drill presses, band saws, and grinders, including micrometers, vernier calipers, and other devices of use in a machine shop or laboratory. Welding techniques and tool making are also considered.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ENGR 1400 - Engineering CommunicationsThis is an undergraduate introductory course covering basic concepts and skills in engineering communication. Topics include technical writing, project planning and proposal writing, data visualization, system modeling and simulation, engineering graphics and CAD, and effective uses of software tools.
ENGR 1600 - Materials Science: Introduction to the scientific principles that dictate the structure and properties of engineering materials, including metals, ceramics, semiconductors, and polymers. Physical properties of materials (mechanical, electrical, thermal, optical) are discussed in terms of the underlying bonding and structure, spanning multiple length scales from atomic packing to micron scale defects, in practical engineering materials. Throughout the course, the material behaviors are understood from the viewpoint of thermodynamics and kinetics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 1100.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: CHEM 1600, PHYS 1600, and ISCI 1600. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and CHEM 1600, PHYS 1600, or ISCI 1600Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5 contact hours
ENGR 2020 - Product Design and Innovation Design Studio II: This design studio focuses on the product development process with an emphasis on problem definition and the impact that the designer has on the final outcome. Students are exposed to basic social science methods of observation and the role they can play in discovering and defining problems. Students are expected to develop a design from initial definition through actual use. Development of individual design skills in design development, presentation, and portfolio building are also emphasized.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENGR 2050 - Introduction to Engineering Design: A first course in engineering design which emphasizes creativity, teamwork, communication, and work across engineering disciplines. Students are introduced to the design process through a semester-long project which provides a design-build-test experience. Oral and written communication are important elements of the course. The course meets with ENGR 1010.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 1100 and ENGR 1200 or ENGR 1400. Corequisite: PHYS 1200.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
ENGR 2090 - Engineering Dynamics: An integrated development of modeling-and problem-solving techniques for particles and rigid bodies emphasizing the use of free-body diagrams, vector algebra, and computer simulation. Topics covered include the kinematics and kinetics of translational, rotational, and general plane motion, energy and momentum methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 1100 and PHYS 1100. Corequisite: MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall and spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENGR 2250 - Thermal and Fluids Engineering I: Application of control volume balances of mass, momentum, energy, and entropy in systems of practical importance to all engineers. Identification of control volumes, properties of pure materials, mass and energy conservation for closed and open systems, second law of thermodynamics, Bernoulli equation, fluid statics, forces and heat transfer in external and internal flows, conduction and radiative heat transfer.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 1100 and PHYS 1100. Corequisite: MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENGR 2300 - Electronic Instrumentation: A survey, application-oriented course for engineering and science majors. Transducers and measurement devices. DC and AC analog circuits including impedance, power, frequency response, and resonance. Diodes, transistors and operational amplifiers. Signal conditioning, noise, and shielding. Digital electronics, A/D and D/A conversation. Power supplies, rectifiers, and electronmagnetic devices.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 1200; corequisite:  MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENGR 2350 - Embedded Control: Engineering laboratory introduction to the microprocessor as an embedded element of engineering systems. Students simultaneously develop the hardware and software of one or more target systems during the semester. Topics include concepts and practices of microcontroller hardware and software for command, sensing, control, and display. Specifically this includes control of dynamic systems and sensor interfaces; analog-digital conversion; parallel input/output; driver circuits, modular programming, and subsystem integration.Prerequisites/Corequisites:  Prerequisite: One of CSCI 1010, CSCI 1100, CSCI 1190 or permission of instructor.
ENGR 2530 - Strength of Materials: Concept of stress and strain, generalized Hookes law, axial load, torsion, pure bending, transverse loading, transformation of stress and strain components in 2-D, design of beams and shafts for strength, deflection of beams, work and energy, columns.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 1100.When Offered: Fall, spring and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENGR 2600 - Modeling and Analysis of Uncertainty: Appreciation and understanding of uncertainties and the conditions under which they occur, within the context of the engineering problem-solving pedagogy of measurements, models, validation, and analysis. Problems and concerns in obtaining measurements; tabular and graphical organization of data to minimize misinformation and maximize information; and development and evaluation of models. Concepts will be supported with computer demonstration. Applications to problems in engineering are emphasized.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1010.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENGR 2700 - Introduction to Manufacturing Planning: Overview of methods used in the design and operation of production and service systems. Topics include forecasting, capacity planning, line balancing, production scheduling, staff scheduling, inventory control, just in time, time study and project planning. Goal of course is to educate students in basic operations management principles and models. Students cannot receive credit for this course and ISYE 2210.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MATH 1020 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENGR 2710 - General Manufacturing Processes: A classroom study of the basic theory and methods of traditional and nontraditional machining, metal joining, material working, and foundry processes, and the variety of functions performed by the primary machine tools employed by the modern manufacturing community. A basic first course or terminal course for all students who are interested in manufacturing processes.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENGR 2720 - Computer Aided Machining: This course will introduce students to the basic concepts associated with computer numerical controlled (CNC) machining. Specifically, the student will be introduced to the processes and operations associated with CNC milling, drilling, and turning. All of these processes will be controlled by code written by the students. Students are expected to apply their knowledge of computer-aided engineering as well as manufacturing processes to class exercises, homework assignments, tests, and a final project.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENGR 2940 - Engineering Project: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
ENGR 2960 - Topics in Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
ENGR 4010 - Professional Development III: Students will study issues associated with working in teams in a modern work environment. Various styles of leadership, the definitions of power and empowerment and their applications in industry and team settings will be studied. Additionally, other topics to be explored include vision, values and attitudes, and organizational culture. The course format will include small and large group discussions, case studies, experiential exercises, and regular participation from industry guests.When Offered: In conjunction with senior courses.Credit Hours: 1
ENGR 4100 - Business Issues for Engineers and Scientists: Investigates business-related considerations in successfully commercializing new technology in a new venture or within an existing enterprise: market and customer analysis, beating the competition, planning and  managing for profitability, high-tech marketing and sales, and business partnerships and acquisitions. Not a general management course; focuses explicitly on what is relevant for engineers and scientists working in a commercial environment. For junior/senior undergraduate or graduate students.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4 credits undergraduate; 3 credits graduate
ENGR 4200 - Fortran Programming: This course provides a practical introduction to computer programming in Classical Fortran, emphasizing selected language features that are useful in performing numerical calculations. It is intended mainly for graduate students in engineering and science who need to use Fortran in research projects and in courses that assume a knowledge of the language or of programming. Grading is based primarily on the students use of Fortran in a significant project, which may be for thesis research or for another course. Required reading (about 17 pages per week) is assigned from the textbook Classical Fortran Second Edition and there might be short in-class quizzes on the reading.Prerequisites/Corequisites: High school algebra. No previous experience with computer programming is required or expected.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1
ENGR 4610 - Product Design and Innovation Design Studio 6:  The sixth design studio for engineering majors participating in the interdisciplinary Programs in Design and Innovation, this course introduces students to organizational dimensions of new concept design, development, and dissemination, including entrepreneurship, organization planning, product management, and branding and marketing. The course requires students to synthesize social, technical, business, and formal concerns in the design of innovative objects, environments, or systems.
ENGR 4710 - Manufacturing Processes and Systems Laboratory I: Manufacturing theory, laboratory experimentation, and manufacturing systems design and development comprised of selected modern manufacturing technologies. Technologies include robotics and automation, injection molding, computer numerically controlled (CNC) machining, metal forming, inspection, rapid prototyping, and advanced manufacturing topics. Student teams apply lessons to develop a proposal to produce a product requiring multiple coordinated manufacturing processes. Students prepare technical documentation for communicating key engineering and management aspects of the developed manufacturing system to a separate fabrication group.
ENGR 4720 - Manufacturing Processes and Systems Laboratory II: Student teams finalize manufacturing system plans from select ENGR 4710 projects, build a manufacturing system to complete several hundred units of a product, optimize the system, manage a project budget, modify manufacturing and packaging plans, and conform to a project schedule as proposed in the associated project Technical Data Packages produced by ENGR 4710 teams. In addition, students will learn new advanced manufacturing topics to increase their breath and depth of manufacturing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 4710.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 6 contact hours
ENGR 4750 - Engineering Economics and Project Management: This course deals with cost analysis in engineering decision making and the management and control of complex projects. Engineering economics topics include interest formulas and equivalence calculations, inflation, measures of investment worth, after tax analysis, depreciation accounting and replacement analyses, life-cycle costing and design economics, risk analysis and cost-benefit analysis. Engineering project management topics include methods for planning, evaluation, organization, budgeting, cost estimating, scheduling, expediting, reporting, monitoring, and implementation of projects. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and either ENGR 4760 or ISYE 4240.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENGR 4760 - Engineering Economics: The objective is to help engineering students recognize and understand the importance of cost factors that are inherent in all engineering decisions. Development of ability to handle engineering problems that involve economic factors. The course includes economic environment, selections in present economy, value analysis, critical path economy, interest and money-time relationships, depreciation and valuation, capital financing and budgeting, basic methods for undertaking economic studies, risk, uncertainty and sensitivity, selections between alternatives, fixed, increment, and sunk costs, the effects of income taxes in economic studies, replacement studies, minimum cost formulas, economic studies of public projects, economic studies in public utilities. Effects of inflation are considered at each step. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ENGR 4750.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENGR 6100 - Business Issues for Engineers and Scientists: Investigates business-related considerations in successfully commercializing new technology in a new venture or within an existing enterprise: market and customer analysis, beating the competition, planning and  managing for profitability, high-tech marketing and sales, and business partnerships and acquisitions. Not a general management course; focuses explicitly on what is relevant for engineers and scientists working in a commercial environment. For junior/senior undergraduate or graduate students.
ENGR 6120 - Advanced Manufacturing Processes and Systems: Advanced Manufacturing Processes and Systems (AMP) is a project-based lecture/laboratory course that teaches graduate engineering students how to develop new manufacturing processes and systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: B.S. in Engineering, MANE 4550 or equivalent, and ENGR 4710 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: MANE 6230.Credit Hours: 4
ENGR 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
ENVE 2110 - Introduction to Environmental Engineering: The application of basic principles and equations dealing with water, air, and solid and hazardous wastes; material and energy balances; and chemical and biochemical cycles. Topics include water resources, water quality and pollution, air quality and pollution, solid and hazardous wastes, and environmental legislation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 1100; Corequisite: MATH 2400. ENGR 2250When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENVE 2940 - Readings in Environmental Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
ENVE 4110 - Aqueous Geochemistry: Fundamentals of aqueous chemistry as applied to the evolution of natural waters. The course covers principles of chemical equilibrium, activity models for solutes, pH as a master variable, concentration and Eh-pH diagrams, mineral solubility, aqueous complexes, ion exchange, and stable isotopes. The carbonate system, weathering reactions, and acid rain are examined in detail. Emphasis is on the chemical reactions that control surface and groundwater evolution in natural and engineered (treatment process) settings. Students learn theory, computation methods, and the use of computer programs for calculation of speciation and mass balance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CHEM 4690 and ERTH 4690. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and either CHEM 4690 or ERTH 4690.Credit Hours: 4
ENVE 4180 - Environmental Process Design: The design of equipment, processes, and systems of interest in environmental engineering through application of scientific, technological and economic principles. Emphasis is placed on problem formulation and conceptual, analytical, and decision aspects of open-ended design situations. Students will integrate knowledge and skills gained in previous and concurrent courses, and learn research techniques to find and use resources from the technical literature. Health and safety issues are presented. Professional development topics are presented including professional ethics and registration. Students will develop communication skills through proposal preparation, report writing, oral presentation. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENVE 2110 and senior standing.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 4200 - Solid and Hazardous Waste Engineering: Classification and characteristics of solid and hazardous wastes; appropriate waste management systems; design of collection and transfer systems; methods of destruction and disposal, including landfills; recycle methods; and salvage and conversion operations for resource recovery.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 4210 - Industrial Waste Treatment and Disposal: Physical, chemical, and biological characteristics of industrial wastes. Application of unit operations and processes to the treatment of waste streams. Consideration of recovery and/or recycling of useful products.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 4240 - Bench Scale Design: The design and operation of different laboratory experiments to provide experience for the environmental engineer in the practical application of chemical and biological theory. Design parameters are developed via bench scale testing. Topics can include biological treatment, phytoremediation, composting of solid waste and soil columns, and microbial respirometry.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 4310 - Applied Hydrology and Hydraulics: Physical processes governing occurrence and distribution of precipitation, infiltration, evaporation, and surface water runoff.  Statistical hydrology, unit hydrograph theory, and watershed modeling. Floodplain hydrology and open channel hydraulics. Urban hydrology, hydraulics and design of storm sewers, and design of detention structures for flood control. Design project using the Army Corps of Engineers Hydraulic Engineering Center HEC-1 flood hydrograph package.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2250 or CHME 4010.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENVE 4320 - Environmental Chemodynamics: The movement of chemicals in air, water, and soil is presented to demonstrate the relation of physiochemical principles in the behavior of chemicals in the environment. Topics include chemical and thermal equilibrium at environmental interfaces, transport fundamentals, and the fate and transport of chemicals in various environmental compartments. Includes experimental analysis of natural and engineered chemical and thermodynamic processes, emphasizing experimental design, data evaluation, and report writing.
ENVE 4330 - Introduction to Air Quality: Quantitative introduction to the engineering methods for the study of air quality. Topics include but are not limited to: estimation procedures for air pollution emissions; indoor air quality problems, impacts and control strategies; sources, impacts and control strategies for greenhouse gases; dispersion modeling for point sources; pollutant acidification of lakes; chemistry of stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric combustion; assessment methods for human exposure to air pollutants. Includes experimental analysis of air quality and air quality control processes, emphasizing experimental design, data evaluation, and report writing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENVE 2110.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ENVE 4340 - Physicochemical Processes in Environmental Engineering: Physical and chemical processes governing water quality in natural and engineered systems with applications to potable water treatment. Topics include reactor dynamics, coagulation and flocculation, sedimentation, filtration, gas transfer, adsorption and ion exchange, and membrane processes. A design project for which students develop a computer model of an environmental process is required. Includes laboratory experiments to measure physicochemical process parameters, emphasizing experimental design, data evaluation, and report writing.
ENVE 4350 - Biological Processes in Environmental Engineering: The study of biochemical and biological processes common to environmental engineering. Introductory physiology, biochemistry and ecology of bacteria, yeasts, fungi. Laboratory work in microbial techniques. Development of reaction rate and mass balances on biological processes for pollution control. Includes experimental analysis of natural and engineered biological processes, emphasizing experimental design, data evaluation, and report writing.
ENVE 4360 - Geomicrobiology: This course examines relationships between microorganisms and Earth processes.Topics include the origins of life on earth, surface metabolism theory, biological and biochemical benchmarks. Earth is considered as a microbial habitat and emphasize the lithosphere and hydrosphere, including soils, seawater, lakes, rivers, and groundwater. Geomicrobial processes, including microbial conversion of inorganics and metals and mineralization of organics, are discussed.Molecular and non-molecular methods for detection, isolation, and identification of geo-microbially active organisms are introduced.Prerequisites/Corequisites: BIOL 1010 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Credit cannot be obtained for both ENVE 6360 Geomicrobiology and ENVE 4360 Geomicrobiology.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 4560 - Isotope GeochemistryFundamentals of Isotope geochemistry as applied to biogeochemical systems in modern and ancient environments. This course covers the principles of both radiogenic and stable isotope distribution, decay, and transfer through earths exchangeable reservoirs. The course will emphasize stable isotopes, equilibrium and kinetic isotope fractionation, distribution, isotope mass balance, and using these systems to track global biogeochemical cycles in the modern environment and in deep time.
ENVE 4710 - Groundwater Hydrology: Study of hydrologic, geologic, and other factors controlling groundwater flow, occurrence, development, chemistry, and contamination. Groundwater flow theory and aquifer test methods are introduced. Interactions between surface and subsurface hydrologic systems are covered. Some field trips are possible. Students cannot receive credit for both ENVE 4710 and ENVE 6110.
ENVE 4940 - Studies in Environmental Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ENVE 4960 - Topics in Environmental Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ENVE 4980 - Senior Project: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ENVE 6110 - Advanced Groundwater Hydrology: An intensive study of hydrologic, geologic, and other factors controlling groundwater flow, occurrence, development, chemistry, and contamination. Groundwater flow theory and aquifer test methods are introduced. Interaction between surface and subsurface hydrologic systems are covered. Some field trips are possible.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ERTH 6710. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ERTH 6710 or ERTH 4710.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6130 - Land Applications of Wastewater: Treatment efficiency and design parameters for different methods of treatment of wastewaters by land application. Methods considered include irrigation, rapid infiltration, overland flow, septic-tank leach field systems, and deep well injection. Soil geology and groundwater flow maintenance, monitoring of systems, and public health considerations. Evaluation of sludge disposal.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6140 - Stream Pollution Control: Principles of limnology applied to the ecological conditions of streams and bodies of fresh water relative to capacity to stabilize organic materials. The economic aspects of water pollution; health aspects of bacterial pollution.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6160 - Environmental Impact Analysis: Studies related to the evaluation of the impacts of major actions by state and federal agencies on the quality of human environment. Consideration is given to the preparation of impact statements. The impacts of various types of action are discussed; the adverse effects produced and alternatives to proposed action considered, and the tradeoffs between short-term uses and long-term productivity are evaluated. Case studies are presented and analyzed.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6190 - Public Health: Occurrence and control of communicable diseases; principles of epidemiology and biostatistics and their application, emphasizing the relationship with environmental factors; food infections and food poisoning; use and impact of pesticides and other methods of pest control; air pollution sources and health effects. Organization of government health agencies.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6200 - Hazardous Waste Management I: This course concentrates on management issues and study of the fate and transport of hazardous materials in the environment. Management topics are broken down into three broad categories: regulatory issues, those necessary for daily operation of an industrial facility (industrial hygiene, storage, and transportation issues), and preliminary environmental site assessments. Fate and transport issues will be dealt with quantitatively.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6210 - Hazardous Waste Management II: A continuation of ENVE 6200. The principal topic discussed is the selection of remediation alternatives and waste minimization.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENVE 6200.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6230 - Mathematical Modeling of Environmental Engineering Systems: Basic modeling approaches and techniques for the simulation of environmental engineering systems. Model development, system conceptualization and analysis, mathematical representation, solution and simulation, as well as model calibration and verification, are discussed. Problems such as simulation of biochemical reactors and behavior of toxic chemicals in groundwater are drawn from the literature. Ongoing research projects are discussed.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6240 - Air Pollution Control: The major approaches to air pollution control are discussed from three viewpoints: equipment for particle and gaseous emissions control, control of specific processes and pollutants, control strategies. Emphasis is on control devices for particles, sulfur oxides, and nitrogen oxides; absorption with chemical reaction; wet scrubber technology. Combination with other approaches to develop control strategies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENVE 4330.When Offered: Upon the availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6250 - Bench Scale Design: The design and operation of different laboratory experiments to provide experience for the environmental engineer in the practical application of chemical and biological theory. Design parameters are developed via bench scale testing. Topics include biological treatment, ion exchange, test for total carbon in a solid waste and PARR bomb calorimeter, soil columns, and microbial respirometry.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6300 - Bioremediation of Hazardous and Toxic Compounds: Lecture course stresses multidisciplinary approaches to the use of microbial system for biotransformation and biodegradation of toxic and hazardous material. Topics include biodegradability, enzymatic transformations, microbial ecology, and properties of organic and inorganic compounds, in situ and ex situ engineering techniques. Real world design examples and projects are introduced. Permission of instructor is required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ENVE 4350 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ENVE 6360 - Geomicrobiology
ENVE 6910 - Colloquium Series: Seminars by distinguished guest speakers and graduate students on current problems in environmental and energy engineering. A broad range of subjects is covered. All undergraduates and graduates are strongly encouraged to attend as many lectures as possible.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 0
ENVE 6940 - Studies in Environmental Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ENVE 6960 - Topics in Environmental Engineering: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ENVE 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
ENVE 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ENVE 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ENVE 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 12
ERTH 1010 - Planet Earth I: The Solid Earth: Age and origin of the Earth, internal constituents, and energy sources; how plates move, oceans develop, resources accumulate, and mountains rise. Gives nonspecialists a picture of the Earths major processes and the ways in which they interact to provide the worlds citizens with adequate material resources. Lectures and recitation. (Students cannot obtain credit for both ERTH 1010 and ERTH 1100.)When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 1020 - Planet Earth II: Oceans and Atmosphere: An overview of the Earth’s surface processes and environment. Nature and interactions between the major oceanic, atmospheric, and terrestrial systems. Interrelations between geology, the environment, and human activities. Geologic and environmental implications, constraints, and opportunities for past, present, and future human populations and cultures. Short-and long-term benefits and consequences of actions or inaction.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 1030 - Natural Sciences I: The sciences of the natural world, focusing primarily upon physics and chemistry but including some discussion of relevant topics in astronomy and planetary science. Both classical and modern concepts are treated, at scales ranging from the atom to the universe, and an effort is made to instill an appreciation for the nature of science and the scientific method. Examples are used as appropriate to illustrate the value of science in our everyday lives. The course is designed for nonscience majors and cannot be used by science majors to fulfill a distribution requirement. (Note: Natural Sciences II does qualify as a science distribution requirement for some science majors.)When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 1040 - Natural Sciences II: The sciences of the natural world, focusing primarily on the earth and life sciences. The course addresses the origin, evolution, and current state of our planet, and examines the earth as a life-supporting system. Specific examples of developments in scientific thinking are used to illustrate connections among the various disciplines comprising the natural sciences. The course is designed for nonscience majors, and cannot be used by students majoring in one of the bio-or geosciences to fulfill a distribution requirement. This restriction does not apply to students majoring in computer science, mathematics, chemistry, or physics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ERTH 1030 or recent course work in basic physics and chemistry.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 1100 - Geology I: Earths Interior: Age and origin of the Earth, internal constituents and energy sources; how plates move, oceans develop, and mountains rise. The course aims to give a quantitative picture of the Earths major processes and the ways in which they interact.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ERTH 1150 - Geology I: Earths Interior Lab: This lab focuses on geological processes in the interior of Earth and how they are manifested at the surface: age and origin of Earth, how rocks form, large scale Earth processes, and energy sources.  Review plate tectonics and the evolution of the main features of Earths surface. Physical and chemical composition of Earth and the large scale dynamics of the planet.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ERTH 1100 corequisite (preferred) or prerequisite.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
ERTH 1200 - Geology II: Earths Surface:  The geological environment of humankind: the atmosphere, oceans, groundwater, rivers, glaciers, deserts, and soils. The course explores the processes by which these and other features develop and change, both naturally and as a result of human activity.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ERTH 1250 - Geology ll: Earths Surface Lab: The lab provides an introduction to analytical approaches, measurements, and observations used by geoscientists to advance our understanding of natural surface earth, hydrologic, and atmospheric processes and the influence of human activities.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ERTH 1200 corequisite (preferred) or prerequisite.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1
ERTH 2100 - Introduction to Geophysics: An introduction to various aspects of the study of the physics of the Earth. Stress and strain, deformation, isostasy, seismic waves, earthquakes, Earth structure, resource exploration, Earth dynamics, plate tectonics, mountain building, gravity and geodesy, magnetic field, and heat flow. Included are weekly labs and occasional field exercises.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ERTH 1100.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 2120 - Structural Geology: Introduction to stress and strain; observation, measurement, recording, and interpretation of rock structures including joints, faults, folds, and fabrics. Interpretation of structures from geologic maps. Structures and regional tectonics. Laboratory and field trips required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ERTH 2210 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 2140 - Introduction to Geochemistry: An introduction to the application of chemistry to problems in the Earth and Environmental Sciences. Topics include thermodynamics and phase equilibria as applied to mineral stability, rock evolution, and water chemistry; stable isotope systematics; radiogenic isotope systematics; trace element geochemistry, organic geochemistry, and geochemical cycles.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CHEM 2540. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CHEM 2540.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 2160 - Introduction to Geobiology: This course focuses on the co-evolution of life with Earths systems and targets students in Earth science, biology, chemistry, and physics. Topics include the emergence and early evolution of life on Earth, the environmental limits of life, microbial and metabolic evolution; the role of life in moderating global elemental cycles; earliest records of life; evolution of photosynthesis and the Great Oxidation Event; fossilization and evolution of complex life; mass radiations, mass extinctions and global changes.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ERTH 1100 recommended but not required. A student cannot get credit for both ERTH 2160 and BIOL 2160.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: BIOL 2160.
ERTH 2210 - Field Methods: Principles and methods of geologic mapping. Use of instruments. Selected field problems. Several field trips (usually on weekends) required. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ERTH 1100 or ERTH 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ERTH 2330 - Earth Materials: Overview of the chemical and physical properties of the material constituents of the Earth and terrestrial planets, including minerals, rocks, lavas, and supercritical water. Topics include mineral structure and composition, bonding, optical properties, phase transformations, and surface properties. The role of minerals in the man-made environment is also discussed.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 2610 - Oceanography: Ocean basins and margins; origin, distribution, chemistry, and history of sediments; physical and chemical properties of seawater; global atmospheric and oceanic circulations and climatic interactions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 1100 and PHYS 1100 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 2620 - Current Topics in Earth Science: This course provides the student with a formal participation in the weekly colloquium series of the Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences. These colloquia involve lectures on a wide variety of topics in the geologic and environmental sciences primarily by outside investigators who are currently active in those fields. (Students may take this course a maximum of two times for credit.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: geology or environmental science majors only or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ERTH 4070 - Sedimentology/Stratigraphy: Formation and interpretation of sediments and sedimentary rocks, including the processes and depositional environments that form them. Analysis of sedimentary sequences, recent sedimentary environments, and their ancient analogs. Principles of correlation. Includes labs and field trips (several one-day field trips on weekends will be required).<br />



ERTH 4180 - Environmental Geology: A consideration of technical and scientific aspects of key geo-societal issues. Case studies and analysis of current and historic data bases will be used to illustrate topics including, but not limited to, climate modification, energy resources, future energy, water resources, water pollution, and health risks posed by lead, mercury, and emerging pollutants.When Offered: Spring term annually. Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4190 - Environmental Measurements: Modern methods used in analysis of environmental samples for monitoring and research purposes. Standard and advanced techniques of air, water, sediment, and soil analysis are covered including spectrometric and chromatographic methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of the instructor required.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4200 - Applied Micropaleontology: This course will encompass marine, freshwater, and terrestrial microfossils (with emphasis on foraminifera), including taxonomy, evolutionary history, ecology and paleoenvironments, and a broad spectrum of micropaleontological applications, such as sea-level and climate reconstructions, geochemical analyses, oil industry research and production, and forensic geology. This course will also cover concepts of biostratigraphy and micropaleontological applications to stratigraphic correlation and time scale construction. Extensive hands-on microscope and labwork will be required.
ERTH 4340 - Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology: Introduction to the observation and interpretation of igneous and metamorphic rocks in outcrop, hand sample, and thin sections. Processes of melting, solidification and migration of magmas; solid state recrystallization and pressure-temperature histories. Heat flow and regional crustal dynamics. Laboratory and field trips required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ERTH 2330 and ERTH 2140.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4350 - Data Science: Data science is advancing the inductive conduct of science and is driven by the greater volumes, complexity and heterogeneity of data being made available over the Internet. It combines aspects of data management, library science, computer science, and physical science. It is changing the way all of these disciplines do both their individual and collaborative work. Key methodologies in application areas based on real research experience are taught. This course meets with ERTH/CSCI/ITWS 4350 and CSCI/ITWS 6350. A student can get credit for only one of these courses.
ERTH 4400 - Xinformatics: Informatics covers a broad range of disciplines addressing challenges in the explosion of data and information resources. Xinformatics provides commonality for implementations in specific disciplines (e.g. X=astronomy, geology). Informatics theoretical bases are information and computer science, cognitive science, social science, library science, aggregating these studies and adding the practice of information processing, and the engineering of information systems. This course grounds the material that students will learn in discipline areas by coursework and project assignments. Students cannot obtain credit for more than one of ITWS or ERTH or CSCI 4400.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 1200, ERTH or CSCI 4960.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: ITWS/CSCI 4400 and ITWS/CSCI/ERTH 6400.Credit Hours: 3
ERTH 4500 - Earths Climate: Past, Present and Future: Overview of physical components of Earths climate system; builds on this foundation by examining the roles of both natural Earth system processes and anthropogenic influences in determining Earths climate and climate changes in the past, present, and future. Initial focus is on recent and future climate change. Remainder of course will emphasize the study and reconstruction of climates and climate change through geologic history.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHEM 1100/1110, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4510 - Origins of Life: A Cosmic Perspective: To understand the origin of life is a fundamental goal of science. This course discusses evidence for important prebiotic molecules in the clouds from which new planetary systems are born, and compares cosmic and terrestrial sources of such molecules on the primitive Earth. The course is multidisciplinary, covering topics in physics, astronomy, chemistry, earth sciences, and biology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ASTR 2050 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: ASTR 4510. Student may not obtain credit for both ASTR 4510 and ERTH 4510.Credit Hours: 3
ERTH 4540 - Organic Geochemistry: A broad survey of organic geochemistry suitable for students with a strong chemistry background who are majoring in science or engineering. Topics include the transport and fate of organic pollutants and the geochemistry of natural organic compounds in oceans, lakes, sediments, and soils.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 2250 and ERTH 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4560 - Isotope Geochemistry: Fundamentals of Isotope geochemistry as applied to biogeochemical systems in modern and ancient environments. This course covers the principles of both radiogenic and stable isotope distribution, decay, and transfer through earths exchangeable reservoirs. This course will emphasize stable isotopes, equilibrium and kinetic isotope fractionation, distribution, isotope mass balance, and using these systems to track global biogeochemical cycles in the modern environment and in deep time. Meets with ENVE 4560. Students may not receive credit for ERTH 4560 and ENVE 4560Prerequisites/Corequisites: CHEM 1100 or permission of instructor; ERTH 1100 recommended but not required.Cross Listed: ENVE 4560.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4570 - Solid Earth Geophysics: The course covers the physics of the Earth’s interior, including a survey of its evolution, rotation, gravity and tides, seismicity, internal heat, magnetism, and tectonics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ERTH 1100 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4650 - Seismology: Introduction to the causes, consequences, and uses of vibrations in the Earth. Topics include elastic wave propagation, earthquake source mechanics, seismic risk analysis, exploration seismology, and tomographic imaging.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020.When Offered: Spring term on demand.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4690 - Aqueous Geochemistry: Fundamentals of aqueous geochemistry as applied to the evolution of natural waters. Principles of chemical equilibrium, activity models for solutes, acid-base chemistry, redox chemistry, mineral solubility, aqueous complexes, ion exchange, and stable isotopes will be covered. The carbonate system, weathering reactions, and redox chemistry are examined in detail. Students learn theory, the basics of analytical techniques, computation methods, and the use of computer programs for speciation, mass balance and reaction path calculations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CHEM 1100 or permission of instructor; ERTH 1100 recommended but not required.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: ERTH 6690 and CHEM 4690. Students cannot obtain credit for more than one of these.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4710 - Groundwater Hydrology: Study of hydrologic, geologic, and other factors controlling groundwater flow, occurrence, development, chemistry, and contamination. Groundwater flow theory and aquifer test methods are introduced. Interactions between surface and subsurface hydrologic systems are covered. Some field trips are possible. (Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ENVE 6710.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020 or equivalent or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: ENVE 4710Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4750 - Geographic Information Systems in the Sciences: Introduction to analysis and interpretation of spatial data and their presentation on maps (using MapInfo software). Concepts of map projections, reference frames, multivariate analysis, correlation analysis, regression, interpolation, extrapolation, and kriging will be covered.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: knowledge of Windows OS.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4810 - Chemistry of the Environment: Chemical processes important in the environment from naturally occurring and man-induced systems. Thermodynamic and chemical considerations of fuels; the thermodynamics of the atmosphere; atmospheric photochemistry; chemistry of natural water systems; chemistry of pesticides, fertilizers, and other important environmental contaminants; aspects of the carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycles.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 1200 and one prior or concurrent course in organic chemistry or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CHEM 4810. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CHEM 4810.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 4940 - Readings in Geology: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ERTH 4960 - Topics in Geology: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ERTH 4970 - Out-of-Classroom Experience in Earth Sciences: Credits are earned while the student gains practical experience in applying skills to working in a private company or government agency in an area relevant to the student’s educational goals. Requires a written proposal and final report.Credit Hours: 2 to 4
ERTH 4980 - Undergraduate Research Thesis: Independent field experience for undergraduates. Requires a written proposal and final report.Credit Hours: 2 to 4
ERTH 6200 - Applied MicropaleontologyThis course will encompass marine, freshwater, and terrestrial microfossils (with emphasis on foraminifera), including taxonomy, evolutionary history, ecology and paleoenvironments, and a broad spectrum of micropaleontological applications, such as sea-level and climate reconstructions, geochemical analyses, oil industry research and production, and forensic geology. This course will also cover concepts of biostratigraphy and micropaleontological applications to stratigraphic correlation and time scale construction. Extensive hands-on microscope and labwork will be required.
ERTH 6300 - Advanced Metamorphic Petrology: In-depth analysis of metamorphic phase equilibria in pelites, amphibolites, carbonates, and ultramafic rocks. Schreinemakers’ analysis, petrogenetic grids, P-T-X relations, reaction space, geothermometry, geobarometry, and analysis of zoned prophyroblasts. Heat flow, metamorphic, and tectonic evolution. Laboratory involves analysis of textural relations in thin section and computer exercises.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 6350 - Data Science: Data science is advancing the inductive conduct of science and is driven by the greater volumes, complexity, and heterogeneity of data being made available over the Internet. It combines aspects of data management, library science, computer science, and physical science. It is changing the way all of these disciplines do both their individual and collaborative work. Key methodologies in application areas based on real research experience are taught. This course meets with ERTH/CSCI/ITWS 4350 and ERTH/CSCI/ITWS 6350. A student can get credit for only one of these courses.<br />
ERTH 6400 - Xinformatics: Informatics covers a broad range of disciplines addressing challenges in the explosion of data and information resources. Xinformatics provides commonality for implementations in specific disciplines (e.g. X=astronomy, geology). Informatics theoretical bases are information and computer science, cognitive science, social science, library science, aggregating these studies and adding the practice of information processing, and the engineering of information systems. This course grounds the material that students will learn in discipline areas by coursework and project assignments. Students cannot obtain credit for more than one of ITWS or ERTH or CSCI 6400.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 1200, ERTH or CSCI 6960.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: ITWS/CSCI 4400, ERTH 4400, and ITWS/CSCI 6400.Credit Hours: 3
ERTH 6540 - Advanced Igneous Petrology: Topical treatment of current problems and frontiers in igneous petrology, with emphasis on physical and chemical processes. Principles of fluid dynamics and chemical kinetics are applied to the formation and evolution of crust-and mantle-derived magmas.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ERTH 4340.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ERTH 6580 - Seminar in Geophysics: Selected Topics: General topics in advanced geophysics vary each time the seminar is offered. Previous subjects covered include crustal deformation, inverse theory, global positioning system, and seismic wave propagation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
ERTH 6690 - Aqueous Geochemistry: Fundamentals of aqueous geochemistry as applied to the evolution of natural waters. Principles of chemical equilibrium, activity models for solutes, acid-base chemistry, redox chemistry, mineral solubility, aqueous complexes, ion exchange, and stable isotopes will be covered. The carbonate system, weathering reactions, and redox chemistry are examined in detail. Students learn theory, the basics of analytical techniques, computation methods, and the use of computer programs for speciation, mass balance and reaction path calculations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CHEM 1100 or permission of instructor; ERTH 1100 recommended but not required.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: ERTH 4690 and CHEM 4690. Students cannot obtain credit for more than one of these.Credit Hours: 4
ERTH 6710 - Advanced Groundwater Hydrology: An intensive study of hydrologic, geologic, and other factors controlling groundwater flow, occurrence, development, chemistry, and contamination. Groundwater flow theory and aquifer test methods are introduced. Interaction between surface and subsurface hydrologic systems are covered. Some field trips are possible. (Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ERTH 4710.)Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ERTH 6940 - Readings in Geology: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ERTH 6960 - Special Topics in Geology: Topics offered previously: geomagnetism, seismology, mineral equilibria; mineral structures; igneous minerals and rocks; sedimentary processes; marine geology, convergent plate margins, geoexploration, remote sensing applications, seismic stratigraphy; physical oceanography.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ERTH 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
ERTH 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ERTH 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ERTH 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
ESCI 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a Master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ESCI 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ESCI 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
IENV 1910 - Environmental Seminar: Topical issues in environmental sciences covered in a seminar and discussion format. Seminar includes guest speakers from academics, industry, non-profits, and government who are experts in an array of environment-related fields. Each class includes weekly reading and short writing assignments. A short final research paper is required (~10 pgs.).When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
IENV 2100 - Introduction to Environmental Studies: An introduction to a variety of ways to study the environment, especially science and technology studies, environmental science, and environmental engineering. Case studies and projects emphasize the cooperation of disciplines in addressing local and global environmental issues such as PCBs in the Hudson River, acid rain in the Adirondacks, and population growth.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
IENV 4700 - One Mile of the Hudson River: A course that focuses on the Hudson River Basin as an environmental microcosm and a vehicle through which to illustrate the natural science of river systems with particular attention to human influences. This interdisciplinary environmental science course is for environmentally oriented junior, senior, and graduate students.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: junior, senior, or graduate student status; introductory courses in biology, chemistry, and geology; environmentally oriented humanities/social sciences courses, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 1110 - Nature and Society: This course focuses on the social and ecological aspects of humans in the natural world. It emphasizes critical thinking about where humans come from and where they are going as a species. The course draws on historical perspectives and addresses contemporary issues such as climate change, national energy resources, and the local foods movement. The course includes readings as well as student projects, field trips, guest lectures, and ethnographic assignments about this consumer society.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: limited to first-year students enrolled in the Vasudha Living and Learning Community, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 1140 - Minds and Machines: This course is an introduction to the philosophy of mind and cognitive science. Students meet in small sections to have class discussions and debates about questions like: What are minds? Are minds physical or non-physical? Do we have free will? Does our reliance on technology turn us into cyborgs? How close are we to building an intelligent robot or machine? Do we want to? Students will learn how make a philosophical argument, and how to express them in writing or through an oral presentation.  This course is communication intensive.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with PHIL 1120; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 1220 - IT and Society: Will IT increase prosperity? For whom? What role should governments play in IT development? Do corporations have new responsibilities in the Information Era? What about IT professionals? This course explores the issues, the arguments, and working solutions. The first section examines macro indicators and trends. The second section examines the microeconomics and politics of specific arenas—the software industry, the automated work place, telemedicine, television. The last section explores opportunities for improving society, using IT. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 1220. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ITWS 1220.Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 1240 - Environment and Politics: Students in this course participate in a series of class debates, presenting and cross-examining the arguments of those who have a stake in various environmental controversies (about energy, toxic chemicals, consumption, etc.).  Students also work in groups to design a proposal for a project to help solve an environmental problem.  Throughout the course, students are encouraged to develop their own environmental values and ideas. This is a communication intensive course.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 1300 - Race and Film in U.S. Culture and History: This course will investigate the emergence and transformations of the concept of race in the history and culture of the United States by analyzing films. Hollywood classics will be featured, and will also be contrasted with documentary and independent films. The course will focus on social and political contexts, as well as the films critical reception and film form.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 1310 - Cultures of Scientific Revolutions: Examines the major transformations of science – including Copernicus and Galileo, the Scientific Revolution, evolutionary theory, relativity theory and quantum mechanics, the Manhattan Project, climate research – from the perspectives of history, philosophy, social science, and literature. Builds understandings of scientific inquiry as a creative activity, inextricable from social and political context.When Offered: Fall term even years.Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 1610 - Product Design and Innovation Design Studio I: The first design studio in the Product Design and Innovation Program introduces students to general design through a series of short projects. The projects stress creative thinking and invention, observation and perception, communication and visualization, sketching, photography, model-making, and especially open-ended exploration.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 1960 - Topics in Interdisciplinary Humanities and Social Science Studies: Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 2610 - Product Design and Innovation Studio III: This studio design course focuses on an enriched sense of problem definition through an emphasis on the reach and interconnectedness of technology, and the conditionality of design selection criteria. Its design exercises, readings, and discussion press beyond marginal substitutions toward a broadened sense of possibility from, for example, “hypercars” and human-powered homes to small-scale local agriculture and extreme ecological living systems. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PDI I or PDI II or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 2960 - Topics in Interdisciplinary Humanities and Social Science Studies: Credit Hours: 4
IHSS 4800 - Experiential Learning Project: This is an individually tailored reading course in which the student does readings and also completes an internship-type field project. The goal is to provide students with immersion in a multicultural milieu involving science and technology issues. Projects include student exchange programs, co-op placement, public service internships, community service, and other individually tailored projects subject to adviser approval. Students are expected to write up a description of their field project that integrates their field experience with the readings.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: completion of other course requirements for the minor.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
IHSS 4960 - Topics in Interdisciplinary Humanities and Social Science Studies: Credit Hours: 3
IHSS 6960 - Topics in Interdisciplinary Humanities and Social Science Studies: Credit Hours: 3
ISCI 1600 - Materials Science: Introduction to the scientific principles that dictate the structure and properties of engineering materials, including metals, ceramics, semiconductors, and polymers. Physical properties of materials (mechanical, electrical, thermal, optical) are discussed in terms of the underlying structure, spanning multiple length scales from atomic packing to micron scale defects, in practical engineering materials. Throughout the course, the material behaviors are understood from the viewpoint of thermodynamics and kinetics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CHEM 1100.When Offered: Fall and Spring term annually.Cross Listed: ENGR 1600, PHYS 1600, and CHEM 1600. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ENGR 1600, PHYS 1600, or CHEM 1600.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5
ISCI 4510 - Origins of Life Seminar: Discussion of current issues relevant to origins of life, in astrophysics, biology, chemistry, and earth sciences.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: junior standing or higher or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
ISCI 4950 - Research Rotation
ISCI 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A professional project often serves as a culminating experience for a professional master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one professional project. Professional projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.Credit Hours: 3 to 4
ISCI 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ISCI 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ISCI 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
ISYE 1100 - Introduction to Industrial & Systems Engineering: An introduction to industrial and systems engineering (ISE). Major elements of the ISE disciplines are overviewed in the context of operations engineering problems. Topics include deterministic and stochastic applications of operations research methods, soft computing, applications of probability and statistics, engineering economics, discrete event simulation, and decision analysis.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
ISYE 2210 - Production and Operations Management: Overview of methods used in the design and operation of production and service systems and basic cost accounting. Topics include forecasting, capacity planning, line balancing, production scheduling, staff scheduling, inventory control, just in time, time study, project planning, and discrete item cost accounting. Goal of course is to educate students in basic operations management principles and models and in discrete goods cost accounting. Students cannot receive credit for this course and ENGR 2700.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 1020 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 2940 - Readings in ISYE: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ISYE 2960 - Topics in ISYE: Credit Hours: 4
ISYE 4140 - Statistical Analysis: Review of simple and multiple regression, selection procedures, regression diagnostics, residual analysis, stepwise regression, analysis of variance, design of experiments including factorial experiments, analysis of ordinal data and nonparametric inference, basic time series models. Extensive use of statistical software. Emphasis on statistical applications to industrial engineering.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2600 and knowledge of calculus.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ISYE 4200 - Design and Analysis of Work Systems: Analysis and design of work and workplace. Topics covered include human-machine systems, ergonomics, work measurement systems, methods and standards, process design, direct time study, standard time data, predetermined time systems, work sampling, work load balancing, and workplace layout. Computer-based analysis of problems in work systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2600 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4210 - Design and Analysis of Supply Chains: An overview of the principles involved in the design and operation of supply chains with applications to manufacturing and service industries. Topics include dynamics of manufacturing systems and supply chains, lean manufacturing, lead time reduction in manufacturing and office operations, advanced pull systems, concurrent design of products and supply chains, rapid new product introduction, remanufacturing and reverse supply chains, and integration of information technology in supply chain operations. The goal of the course is to enable students to synthesize models and tools and to understand how these could be applied to address emerging challenges in manufacturing and service systems and their supply chains.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ISYE 2210 or MGMT 4110, and ENGR 2600 or MGMT 2100 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4220 - Optimization Algorithms and Applications: Design, analysis, and implementation of algorithms for combinatorial optimization problems. Introduction to theoretical analysis of algorithms and applications that can be formulated as combinatorial optimization problems. Specific topics include complexity analysis, network flow problems, traveling salesperson problems, matching problems, knapsack problems, and greedy algorithms. Implementation of combinatorial algorithms in a commercial software language. An introduction to this software language will be given at the beginning of the course. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ISYE 4600 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4230 - Quality Control: The statistical approach to manufacturing quality control is emphasized. Consideration is given to the managerial implications and responsibilities in implementing the statistical approach. Topical coverage includes construction and interpretation of various control charts; special control charts (e.g., CUSUM, EWMA); graphical methods; specifications, tolerance limits, process capability indices; acceptance sampling; discussion of experimental design; and Taguchi methods of quality improvement.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ISYE 4140 or ISYE 4760 (MATP).When Offered: Spring tern annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4240 - Engineering Project Management: Planning, controlling, and evaluating engineering projects. Use of network analysis techniques, PERT/CPM, budget control, time/cost tradeoff, time estimation, resource allocation, and resource leveling. Extensions include probabilistic models, multiple resource models, project organization, risk analysis, technical forecasting, and network theory. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ENGR 4750.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4250 - Facilities Design and Industrial Logistics: An in-depth study of the major design issues in location and physical configuration of production and service facilities. The course emphasizes the use of mathematical models, computer modeling, and quantitative analysis as aids to the design process. Topics include plant layout and location, material handling, material flow analysis, and distribution systems. Major course concepts are developed through case studies and projects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ISYE 2210 or equivalent, ISYE 4140 or equivalent, and an introductory operations research course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4260 - Human Performance Modeling and Support: This course introduces methods, tools, and technologies for describing human performance via various types of models, and supporting this performance via tools and advanced technologies. The course is hands-on, involving student projects that investigate human performance in challenging domains as well as direct engagement with technologies for decision support.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2600.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4270 - Multidisciplinary Capstone Design: A capstone design experience that engages students from biomedical, computer systems, electrical, industrial, materials, and mechanical engineering on teams in an open-ended engineering design problem in preparation for professional practice.  With the guidance of a multidisciplinary team of faculty members and instructional support staff, students apply knowledge and skills from prior coursework.  This s a communication intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2050, senior standing.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 4900, MTLE 4920, and MANE 4260.  Students cannot obtain credit for this course and ECSE 4900, MTLE 4920, MANE 4260.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4280 - Decision Focused Systems Engineering: The objective of this course is to introduce students to systems engineering, especially from a decision-focused perspective. System concepts, methodologies, models, and analysis are covered in relation to a systems design, development, test, evaluation, and operation. Decisions concerning a systems reliability, maintainability, usability, disposability, and affordability are systematically considered. A range of systems, including service systems, is also considered.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Pre-or corequisite: ENGR 2600.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4290 - Discrete Event Simulation Modeling and Analysis
ISYE 4300 - Complex Systems Models for Industrial and Systems Engineering: This course introduces simulation-based modeling methods for complex systems frequently encountered and used by industrial and systems engineers. Examples include production systems, queuing networks, communication systems, healthcare systems, supply chains, social networks, transportation systems, and financial markets. This course introduces techniques including discrete-event simulation and agent-based simulation for modeling and analyzing interdependent, interacting, and coupling variables, agents, components, and related subsystems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ISYE 4290.<span style="font-size:18pt;font-family:Calibri;color:rgb(0,0,0);">
ISYE 4310 - Ethics of Modeling for Industrial and System Engineering: This course introduces students to past, current, and future issues in the ethics of information technology, and encourages students to develop their own standpoint from which to address the diverse range of ethical challenges faced in the information age. During the course, students will learn about a wide range of ethical theories, and then will apply these theories to address ethical dilemmas in creating models for decision support using an educational computer simulation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  ENGR 2600 and CSCI 1010 or CSCI 1100 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4320 - Theory of Production Scheduling: Problems of scheduling several tasks over time. Topics include measures of performance, single machine sequencing, flowshop scheduling, the job shop problem, and priority dispatching. Integer programming, dynamic programming, and heuristic approaches to various problems are also presented.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ISYE 4600.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: ISYE 6210. Students cannot get credit for both ISYE 4320 and ISYE 6210.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4330 - Design of Experiments: Methods of designing experiments so that statistical analysis of the resulting data will yield the maximum useful information. Testing of hypotheses; analysis of variance and covariance. Various designs, including the factorial and its modifications, incomplete blocks, Latin squares, and response surface designs are covered. Also discussed are optimality properties of design.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ISYE 4140 or MATP 4600 and ISYE 4760 (MATP 4620) or permission of the intructor.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Cross Listed: ISYE 6020.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4530 - Information Systems: This course surveys information-systems technology for the management of enterprise information as a resource. Topics include elements of system design life cycle, database concepts, and decision support. Managerial and technical dimensions of information systems are blended in a framework for IS systems. Additional topics include telecommunications, artificial intelligence (including expert systems), and structured design. The implementation, operation, and maintenance of information systems are also discussed. Projects are required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 1190 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ISYE 4600 - Operations Research Methods: An introduction to commonly used methods of deterministic and stochastic operations research. Topics include linear programming, simplex algorithms, duality, linear networks, integer programming, dynamic programming, goa1 programming, location models, exact and heuristic solution procedures for integer and sequencing problems, queuing theory, Markov chains, multi-criteria decision making, and decision analysis. Students cannot get credit for both ISYE 4600 and ISYE 6610. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2600 and MATH 1020.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ISYE 4760 - Mathematical Statistics: A course in the theory of statistics which will provide students with a basic foundation for more specialized statistical methodology courses. Topics include sampling and sampling distributions; point estimation including method of moments, maximum likelihood estimation, uniform minimum variance estimation and properties of the associated estimators; confidence intervals; hypothesis testing including uniformly most powerful, likelihood ratio approaches, chi-square tests for goodness-of-fit and independence. The course will conclude with an introduction to linear statistical models.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATP 4600 or equivalent calculus-based course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MATP 4620. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATP 4620.Credit Hours: 4
ISYE 4810 - Computational Intelligence: With ever-increasing computer power readily available, new engineering methods based on “soft computing” are emerging at a rapid rate. This course provides students a working knowledge in computational intelligence covering the basics of fuzzy logic, neural networks, genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, wavelet analysis, fractal structures, and chaotic time series analysis. Applications in control, optimization, data mining, fractal image compression, and time series analysis are illustrated with engineering case studies.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 4940 - Readings in ISYE: Credit Hours: 1 to 6
ISYE 4960 - Topics in ISYE: Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6010 - Applied Regression Analysis: Emphasis is on empirical model building and evaluation for both multiple linear and nonlinear regression models. Topics specifically addressed are simultaneous estimation, diagnostics and remedial measures, selection procedures, locally weighted least squares classification variables, binary response variables, time series data, nonlinear estimation, software packages.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ISYE 4140 or MATP 4600 and ISYE 4760 (MATP 4620) or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6020 - Design of Experiments: Methods of designing experiments so that statistical analysis of the resulting data will yield the maximum useful information. Testing of hypotheses; analysis of variance and covariance. Various designs, including the factorial and its modifications, incomplete blocks, Latin squares, and response surface designs are covered. Also discussed are optimality properties of design.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ISYE 4140 or MATP 4600 and ISYE 4760 (MATP 4620) or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Cross Listed: ISYE 4330.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6100 - Time Series Analysis: Study of time series data for both description and prediction. Main emphasis on the classical Box-Jenkins approach to model identification, estimation, and diagnosis. Includes an introduction to spectral analysis. Applications to real data series, including forecasting problems and empirical comparison of alternative approaches. Use of computer packages for time series analysis.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ISYE 4760 (MATP 4620) or equivalent.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6180 - Knowledge Discovery with Data Mining: Data mining is the computationally intelligent extraction of information from large databases. It is the process of automated presentation of patterns, rules, and functions from large data bases to make crucial business decisions. This course takes a multi-disciplinary approach to data mining and knowledge discovery involving statistics, rule and tree induction, neural networks, genetic algorithms, visualization and fuzzy logic. The course is project driven and puts a special emphasis on the use of computational intelligence for scientific data mining related to drug design and bioinformatics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2600 or equivalent introductory course in statistics.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6210 - Theory of Production SchedulingProblems of scheduling several tasks over time. Topics include measures of performance, single machine sequencing, flowshop scheduling, the job shop problem, and priority dispatching. Integer programming, dynamic programming, and heuristic approaches to various problems are also presented.Prerequisites/Corequisites:  Prerequisite: introductory course in operations research.
ISYE 6500 - Information and Decision Technologies for Industrial and Service Systems: This course emphasizes topics related to information systems and decision making including information and decision systems in organizations, database systems, knowledge systems, system analysis and design, networks and telecommunications in information systems, information systems for service delivery.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6600 - Design of Manufacturing System Supply Chains: Dynamics of manufacturing systems and supply chains, lean manufacturing, lead time reduction in manufacturing and service operations, advanced pull systems, concurrent design of products and supply chains, rapid new product introduction, remanufacturing and reverse supply chains, and integration of information technology in supply chain operations. Analysis of models and their application to design and planning problems in manufacturing as well as service systems is emphasized.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ISYE 4140 (or equivalent) or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6610 - Systems Modeling in Decision Sciences: Survey of decision science methodologies in the context of technical and economic decision problems. The course seeks to develop a conceptual understanding of these methods and basic implementation skills. Students will learn how to apply decision science methods from problem recognition and data development through problem formulation and computer solution.  Students cannot get credit for both ISYE 4600 and ISYE 6610.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ISYE 4140 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6620 - Discrete-Event Simulation: A thorough development of a simulation language is stressed in order to progress through a series of increasingly sophisticated applications of computer simulation. Projects cover a wide range of topics: production systems, inventory, finance, transportation, and public systems. The course includes model development, statistical analysis of simulation input/output data, validation planning, and managing simulation projects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ISYE 4140 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6760 - Combinatorial Optimization and Integer Programming: Review of exact and heuristic methods for solving discrete problems, including the traveling salesman problem, the knapsack problem, packing and covering problems. Algorithm complexity and NP-completeness, cutting plane methods and polyhedral theory, branch and bound, simulated annealing, tabu search, Lagrangian duality.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: introductory course in operations research.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MATP 6620. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATP 6620.Credit Hours: 4
ISYE 6770 - Linear Programming: A unified development of linear systems and linear programming, polyhedral theory, the simplex method, interior point methods, decomposition methods for large scale linear programming problems, the ellipsoid method, column generation algorithms for stochastic programming and other problems. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: introductory course in operations research.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MATP 6640. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATP 6640.Credit Hours: 4
ISYE 6780 - Nonlinear Programming: Convex sets and functions, optimality conditions in nonlinear programming, Lagrangian duality, quadratic programming algorithms for nonlinear programming including Newtons method, quasi-Newton methods, conjugate gradient methods, together with proofs of convergence.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 4200 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MATP 6600. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATP 6600.Credit Hours: 4
ISYE 6820 - Queuing Systems and Applications: A course on fundamentals of stochastic processes and queuing theory emphasizing applications. Poisson processes, renewal processes, Markov chains, general methods in the study of Markovian and non-Markovian systems, tandem queues, networks of queues, priority and bulk queues, computational methods and simulation. Focus of the course is the application of these tools in the performance evaluation and design of computer systems, communication networks, manufacturing systems, and service systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ECSE 2500 or MATP 4600 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 6820. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ECSE 6820.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6840 - Modeling Large-Scale Systems: Applications of operations research and systems analysis techniques to mathematical modeling of complex systems, especially large-scale public systems. Discussion of model-building approaches, emphasizing the role of creativity, rationality, and mathematics. Introduction of important quantitative techniques (e.g., geometrical probability, optimization theory, and stochastic processes) and their application to modeling emergency service systems, spatial distribution of public service facilities, congestion, land-use patterns, transportation systems, demographics, and energy.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: Introductory course in operations research and ECSE 2500 or equivalent; ECSE 6830 desirable.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 6840. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ECSE 6840.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6870 - Introduction to Neural Networks: Neural networks are program and memory at once, useful where traditional techniques fail, i.e., for artificial speech and image recognition. Emphasis on existing and emerging engineering applications. Parallel distributed processing, Hebb’s rule, Hopfield net, back-propagation algorithm, perceptrons, unsupervised learning, Kohenen self-organizing map, genetic algorithms, neocognitron, adaline. Illustrated with computer programs and lectures.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3



ISYE 6900 - Seminar in ISYE Research: A review of active ISYE doctoral research projects and activities. Students develop a research paper or proposal under the guidance of a selected faculty adviser and present research findings in class. It is anticipated that the research paper will lead to identification of the broad area of dissertation research. The proposal should be of a quality that can be submitted to an external funding agency.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ISYE doctoral student or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6940 - Readings in ISYE: Credit Hours: 3 to 6
ISYE 6960 - Topics in ISYE: Credit Hours: 3
ISYE 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
ISYE 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ISYE 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presented, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
ISYE 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
ITWS 1100 - Introduction to Information Technology and Web ScienceThis course introduces students to the field of information technology and Web science, the types of problems encountered in the field, and the solution approaches used to solve them. Through a series of activities and projects, students are introduced to topics such as Web systems design, emerging Web standards, database systems, security, and computer networking. Guest speakers highlight information technology practices in industry. Students work in groups on a team project and presentation at the end of the course.
ITWS 1220 - IT and Society: Will IT increase prosperity? For whom? What role should governments play in IT development? Do corporations have new responsibilities in the Information Era? What about IT professionals? This course explores the issues, the arguments and working solutions. The first section examines macro indicators and trends. The second section examines the microeconomics and politics of specific arenas—the software industry, the automated work place, telemedicine, television. The last section explores opportunities for improving society, using IT. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as IHSS 1220. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and IHSS 1220.Credit Hours: 4
ITWS 2110 - Web Systems Development: This course involves a study of the methods used to extract and deliver dynamic information on the World Wide Web. The course uses a hands-on approach in which students actively develop Web-based software systems. Additional topics include installation, configuration, and management of Web servers. Students are required to have access to a PC on which they can install software such as a Web server and various programming environments.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ITWS 1100 and CSCI 1200.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ITWS 2210 - Introduction to Human Computer Interaction: An introduction to the current theories, methods, and issues in human-computer interaction. Theory and research along with practical application are discussed within the context of organizational impact. The course provides the knowledge of HCI systems and research used for the implementation of safe, quick, and useable interactive technologies.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ITWS 4100 - Information Technology and Web Science Capstone: Students work on collaborative projects to design innovative ITWS solutions which address a specific problem or area of need in the students field. Students work to identify a problem and research viable solutions. They go on to propose, design, and prototype their ITWS solution learning best practices for ITWS project management, communication, and user-center design, This course serves as the culminating experience for the undergraduate ITWS program. Restricted to ITWS majors. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ITWS 2210 and ITWS 4310.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 6800.  Students cannot receive credit for both ITWS 4100 and ITWS 6800 during the same semester.Credit Hours: 4
ITWS 4300 - Business Issues for Engineers and Scientists: Investigates business-related considerations in successfully commercializing new technology in a new venture or within an existing enterprise: market and customer analysis, beating the competition, planning and managing for profitability, high-tech marketing and sales, and business partnerships and acquisitions. Not a general management course; focuses explicitly on what is relevant for engineers and scientists working in a commercial environment. For junior/senior undergraduate or graduate students.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ENGR 4100/ENGR 6100 and ITWS 6300. Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 4 credit hours undergraduate; 3 credit hours graduate
ITWS 4310 - Managing IT Resources: This course provides an introduction to fundamental concepts of management and applies them to IT. It examines the use of IT in business processes and the management issues of integrating IT into organizational processes to gain competitive advantage. Topics include: management, organizations, and information systems; development life cycle; project management and systems engineering; process reengineering; and organizational learning. This course includes the planning, development, and implementation of an IT project for a real client.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ITWS 2110 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ITWS 4350 - Data Science: Data science is advancing the inductive conduct of science and is driven by the greater volumes, complexity and heterogeneity of data being made available over the Internet. It combines aspects of data management, library science, computer science, and physical science. It is changing the way all of these disciplines do both their individual and collaborative work. Key methodologies in application areas based on real research experience are taught.
ITWS 4370 - Information System Security: This course covers foundational models for information security, policies, authentication, access control, database security, assurance, auditing, and intrusion detection. It also devotes substantial time to secure coding practices. Students will be expected to complete projects that explore an aspect of information security in detail. Cryptography is not covered since it is a focus of other courses.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CSCI 2500 or ECSE 2660, and CSCI 1200. Experience with database systems recommended.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
ITWS 4400 - X-Informatics: Informatics covers a broad range of disciplines addressing challenges in the explosion of data and information resources. X-informatics provides commonality for implementations in specific disciplines, e.g. X=astro, geo. Informatics theoretical bases are information and computer science, cognitive science, social science, library science, aggregating these studies and adding the practice of information processing, and the engineering of information systems. This course grounds the material that students will learn in discipline areas by coursework and project assignments. Note: Students cannot obtain credit for both ITWS 4400 and ITWS6400.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CSCI 1200 and Data Science (CSCI/ERTH/ITWS 4350/6350).When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 6400, CSCI 4400/6400 and ERTH 4400/6400.  Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
ITWS 4500 - Web Science Systems DevelopmentBuildingon the technology covered in Web Systems Development, students will be exposed to current technologies, frameworks, and practices in the area of Web development. Types of topics included will be HTML5/CSS3, APIs for data, Ruby on Rails, node.js, MongoDB, PHP, and RDF. Methodology to be explored will be application design, software versioning, and team development. Lab intensive, this course is intended to complete a foundation for the advanced courses in Data Science and Advanced Web Science.
ITWS 4600 - Data Analytics: The world at-large is confronted with increasingly larger and complex sets of structured/unstructured information; from cyber and human sources. Traditional enterprises are moving toward analytics-driven approaches for core business functions. Data and information analytics extends analysis (descriptive models of data) by using data mining and machine learning methods, with optimization and validation, to recommend action or guide and communicate decision-making. Thus, analytics is an entire methodology rather then individual analyses or analysis steps.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Data Science ITWS/CSCI/ERTH 4350/6350 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 6600.  Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
ITWS 4700 - Software Development: This course teaches students about the roles and infrastructure of IT departments in modern organizations, IT software engineering technologies and methodologies for software development life cycle through hands-on experience. The course is for students with software development background to enhance their knowledge of software development and management, the software development industry, open source community, etc.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Programming languages (Java, or C#, or C++, and Script, XML, SQL), concepts of OO and design patterns, and basics of IDEWhen Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 6700.  Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
ITWS 4980 - Special Projects: Active participation in a senior-level project supervised by a faculty member and requiring a presentation and project report. Grades of in-progress are assigned until the special project has been approved by the faculty member.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1-4
ITWS 4990 - Senior ThesisA two-semester spring-fall or fall-spring course dealing with an advanced level independent research project supervised by a faculty member and requiring the presentation of a thesis. First term registration is limited to second semester juniors and first semester seniors. The grade for the first semester will be listed as in progress.
ITWS 6300 - Business Issues for Engineers and Scientists: Investigates business-related considerations in successfully commercializing new technology in a new venture or within an existing enterprise: market and customer analysis, beating the competition, planning and managing for profitability, high-tech marketing and sales, and business partnerships and acquisitions. Not a general management course; focuses explicitly on what is relevant for engineers and scientists working in a commercial environment. For junior/senior undergraduate or graduate students.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ENGR 4100/ENGR 6100 and ITWS 4300. Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 4 credit hours undergraduate; 3 credit hours graduate
ITWS 6350 - Data Science: Data science is advancing the inductive conduct of science and is driven by the greater volumes, complexity and heterogeneity of data being made available over the Internet. It combines aspects of data management, library science, computer science, and physical science. It is changing the way all of these disciplines do both their individual and collaborative work. Key methodologies in application areas based on real research experience are taught.
ITWS 6400 - X-Informatics: Informatics covers a broad range of disciplines addressing challenges in the explosion of data and information resources. X-informatics provides commonality for implementations in specific disciplines, e.g. X=astro, geo. Informatics theoretical bases are information and computer science, cognitive science, social science, library science, aggregating these studies and adding the practice of information processing, and the engineering of information systems. This course grounds the material that students will learn in discipline areas by coursework and project assignments. Note: Students cannot obtain credit for both ITWS 4400 and ITWS6400.Prerequisites/Corequisites: CSCI 1200 and Data Science (CSCI/ERTH/ITWS 4350/6350).When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 4400, CSCI 4400/6400 and ERTH 4400/6400.  Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
ITWS 6600 - Data Analytics: The world at-large is confronted with increasingly larger and complex sets of structured/unstructured information; from cyber and human sources. Traditional enterprises are moving toward analytics-driven approaches for core business functions. Data and information analytics extends analysis (descriptive models of data) by using data mining and machine learning methods, with optimization and validation, to recommend action or guide and communicate decision-making. Thus, analytics is an entire methodology rather then individual analyses or analysis stepsPrerequisites/Corequisites: Data Science ITWS/CSCI/ERTH 4350/6350 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 4600.  Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
ITWS 6700 - Software Development: This course teaches students about the roles and infrastructure of IT departments in modern organizations, IT software engineering technologies and methodologies for software development life cycle through hands-on experience. The course is for students with software development background to enhance their knowledge of software development and management, the software development industry, open source community, etc.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Programming languages (Java, or C#, or C++, and Script, XML, SQL), concepts of OO and design patterns, and basics of IDE.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 4700.  Students can only obtain credit for one of these courses.Credit Hours: 3
ITWS 6800 - Information Technology Masters Capstone: Integration of the knowledge and professional practice of the Masters in IT core and concentration courses. Topics in database systems, networking, software design, human computer interaction, management of technology, and ethics are applied within a framework of global e-business strategy. The course utilizes a Team Project with a real organization to practice major IT concepts. Team members select, develop, and present a significant technology implementation project, incorporating strategy, systems development, and business planning.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 4100.  Students cannot receive credit for both ITWS 4100 and ITWS 6800 during the same semester.Credit Hours: 3
ITWS 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser and the Office of Graduate Education to then be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3-4
ITWS 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presented, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3-6
LANG 1110 - French I: This introductory course deals with the basic elements of the French language and, in so doing, places equal stress on speaking, listening, and writing abilities, using daily-life vocabulary. Intensive oral drills designed to teach good speaking habits make class attendance compulsory. This course is enhanced by the use of audio-visual materials the purpose of which is to expose the student to contemporary broadly based French culture which constitutes the foundation for an end of the semester paper (in English).When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 1120 - French II: This course, a continuation of French I, is a practical approach to everyday situations through the development of listening, speaking, and writing abilities. Intensive oral drills of a more complex nature designed to achieve fluency, make class attendance compulsory. The reading of short anecdotes on French life provides exposure to written French. This course is enhanced by the use of audio-visual materials designed to expose the student to contemporary French culture which constitutes the basis for an end of the semester paper (in English).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 1110 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 1210 - Japanese I: Introduction to basic aspects of Japanese grammar, conversation, reading, and writing. Practice with everyday situations with focus on various features of Japanese life and culture.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 1220 - Japanese II: Continuation of Japanese I. Grammar, conversation, reading, and writing will be emphasized. The course will focus on various features of Japanese life and culture. The class will consist of short lectures with various communication drills, written and spoken. Approximately 30 Kanji characters will be introduced.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 1210 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 1310 - German I: Introductory course in the basic elements of German language and aspects of contemporary culture. Equal stress on speaking, reading, writing, and listening. Cultural materials used as a basis for reading comprehension and elementary conversation.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 1320 - German II: Continuation of German I, supplemented by authentic readings in literature and culture. Presupposes a basic knowledge of German grammar and vocabulary such as acquired in German I.When Offered: Offered upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 1410 - Chinese I: This course assumes no previous knowledge of the subject. The course is designed to provide students with fundamental skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing Mandarin Chinese. Oral and aural skills will be emphasized. Background on Chinese culture will be introduced as an element of the course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 1510 - Spanish I: This course is specially designed to provide beginners with fundamental skills in listening, speaking, reading, and writing Spanish. The primary stress will be on Spanish phonetics and basic grammar drills. After taking this course, students will be able to function in everyday situations in an environment in which Spanish is spoken.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 1520 - Spanish II: This course provides a review and further development of the basic language skills introduced in the Level I course and continues to explore the history, arts, and cultures of Spain, Latin America, and the Hispanic population of the United States. Students hear and present brief informal oral presentations in Spanish, read passages dealing with contemporary cultural and political issues, short stories, myths and poems, and are encouraged to discuss and write about those things which interest them.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: Spanish I or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 1610 - Italian I: In this course, students will develop basic conversational and comprehension skills in Italian and gain familiarity with essential aspects of Italian culture. The course will include basic readings and an array of cultural materials to acquaint students with life in an Italian-speaking environment.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 2110 - French III: This course takes a two-pronged approach to conversational fluency, writing competency, and reading skills by offering a review and an expansion of grammar through grammatical exercises and by providing audio-visual materials and texts that focus on various aspects of French culture while raising cross-cultural awareness. The learning and practice of an extensive vocabulary give the student the wherewithal to write an end of the semester essay in French on an aspect of French culture.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 1120 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 2120 - French IV: This course is a continuation of French III. While similar in form and content, the audio-visual materials and texts offered stress the accomplishments of the Francophonie in the arts and sciences.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 2110 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 2210 - Japanese III: Continuation of Japanese II. The course reinforces fundamental skills introduced in Japanese I and II and further develops functional ability to communicate in Japanese beyond the elementary level. The class consists of short lectures with various communication activities, written and spoken. Aspects of contemporary Japanese culture will also be discussed. Approximately 45 new Kanji characters will be introduced.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: LANG 1210 and LANG 1220 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 2220 - Japanese IV: Continuation of Japanese III. This course will extend the knowledge and the skills acquired in Japanese I through III to the intermediate level. The course will further develop fluency in conversational skill while reading and writing skills of more complex texts are emphasized. Approximately 120 new Kanji characters will be introduced.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: LANG 1210, LANG 1220, and LANG 2210 or consent of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 2310 - German III: Discussion of readings in contemporary German culture and literature. Further development of the skills acquired in German I and II. The entire course is conducted in German.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 1320 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 2410 - Chinese II: This is a continuation of Chinese I, a course for the standard modern Chinese language (Mandarin). Students learn more Chinese characters and words, reach a total of nearly 500 characters and 650 words, and use more complicated grammatical structures, including some compliment phrases and topic-comment sentences. In sum, students will learn more in all four aspects—listening, speaking, reading, and writing—presented in Chinese I.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 1410 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 2420 - Chinese III: This is a continuation of Chinese II, a course for the standard modern Chinese language (Mandarin). Students learn more Chinese characters and words, reach a total of about 650 characters, 1000 words, and use more complicated grammatical structures, e.g., reduplication of adjectives and verbs, resultative and potential compliments. In sum, students learn more in all four aspects—listening, speaking, reading and writing—presented in Chinese II. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 2410 or equivalent or permission of instructor. When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 2940 - Language Studies: Readings and projects adapted to the needs of individual students.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 4210 - French Readings in the Arts and Sciences: This course introduces the student to the written French in the Arts and Sciences. The student is taught the grammar and the translation techniques needed to translate texts from French into English. The texts chosen cover a wide range of literature, from the literary to the more popular genres of mass communications. The course is intended for those who will take the foreign language proficiency examination and is useful for those who plan to work for a multinational company. A grade of A or B satisfies the language requirement.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: prior knowledge of French required. Open only to graduate and senior students. No core program credit.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 4400 - Business French I: This course surveys the technical and cultural aspects of the French business world within its geographical, social, and political context. It provides the student with insights into the social and political make-up of French society as they affect the economy of France and her trading partners. It introduces the vocabulary and the essential tools needed by business professionals and requires an extensive practice in business writing and communication. Audio-visual materials supplement the text by helping the student to discover the French business world and its language and by bridging the gap between French and American business cultures.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 2120 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 4410 - Business French II: This course is a continuation of Business French I using the same format. It constitutes the second part of a two-course series.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 4400.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 4430 - Chinese IV: This is a continuation of Chinese III, a course for standard modern Chinese language (Mandarin). Students learn additional Chinese characters and words, reach a total of about 800 characters, 1350 words, and complicated grammatical structures, e.g., expression of approximation, comparison of structural and aspect particles, etc. In sum, students learn more in all four aspects—listening, speaking, reading, and writing—presented in Chinese III.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 2420 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 4470 - Chinese V: Chinese V is a continuation of Chinese IV, a course for standard modern Chinese language (Mandarin). Students learn additional Chinese characters and words, reach a total of about 950 characters, 1700 words, and complicated grammatical structures, e.g., idiomatic expressions, expressions of comparison, concession, and subjection, etc. In sum, students learn more in all four aspects – listening, speaking, reading and writing – presented in Chinese IV.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LANG 4430 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 4500 - Japanese V: This course is a continuation of Japanese IV, an intermediate course for standard modern Japanese language. The course aims to further develop communicational skills with a socio-cultural appropriateness, while reading and writing skills are emphasized. This course covers Chapters 6 through 9 of Nakama 2, and 120 new Kanji characters will be introduced. The course will cover a range of topics including: honorific and humble expressions; asking and giving directions; gifts giving; employment; expressing complaints. This course may be applied towards the fulfillment of the minor in Japanese.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  LANG 1210, LANG 1220, LANG 2210, and LANG 2220 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 4940 - Language Studies: Readings and projects adapted to the needs of individual students.Credit Hours: 4
LANG 6940 - Language Studies: Readings and projects adapted to the needs of individual students.Credit Hours: 3
LGHT 4230 - Lighting Design: A design studio that explores the roles of light in architecture and its application by design. Students conceive, evaluate, and synthesize solutions that contribute to successful lighting and architectural design.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LGHT 4770 - Lighting Technologies and Applications: This course provides students with an in-depth understanding of the components of advanced lighting systems and enables them to critically explore applications of those components. Through lectures, readings, assignments, and application projects, students acquire working knowledge of the relevant products and techniques for lighting application and develop solutions to lighting problems. Students will undertake practical applications of advanced lighting technologies and develop skills in the application of photometric data, use of manual and computer-based lighting calculations, and the development of lighting specifications.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LGHT 4840 - Human Factors in Lighting: An introduction to lighting and human factors, including classical literature and contemporary studies and development of skills needed to conduct and evaluate human factors research.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
LGHT 4940 - Advanced Individual Projects in Lighting: Individual projects and readings adapted to the needs of individual students at the advanced level.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
LGHT 6750 - Lighting Research Design: An introduction to the philosophy of research and different approaches to it. Emphasis is placed on planning, executing, analyzing, and describing experiments. Each student is required to keep a laboratory notebook and to perform statistical tests in concert with assigned research projects.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LGHT 6760 - Lighting Workshop: The Lighting Workshop is a research and design studio integrating scholarship, technology, design, policy, and communication in an intensive, project specific context. The course includes a number of topics, selected each year by faculty. These topics are selected to emphasize scholarship; require a variety of written and verbal presentation techniques; increase synthesizing skills in design, applications, and visualization software; and require teamwork and individual efforts. The Lighting Workshop emphasizes studio and seminar work supplemented with lecture, class discussions, and individual and group research, design, writing, and reading assignments.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LGHT 4230.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LGHT 6770 - Light and Health: This course will explore the effects of light and lighting on peoples physical and psychological health and well-being. Lectures will focus on the physiology of the visual and circadian systems, the relationship between lighting and visual performance and circadian photobiology, including the relationship between lighting and Alzheimers disease, sleep disorder, alertness, seasonal affective disorder (SAD), and breast cancer. The course will conclude with a research project studying the interaction of light and human health in the built environment. Students will learn to apply their newly acquired knowledge of the health effects of light to lighting design and application.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: LGHT 4840.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LGHT 6780 - Lighting Leadership Seminar: A series of topics and case studies to prepare students for leadership roles in the lighting industry. Topics relate to product innovation and factors influencing changes of policy and processes in the lighting industry and involve lecture and discussion sessions and reading assignments. Case studies examine selected topics in greater depth, using actual situations to illustrate interactions of technology and business forces.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LGHT 6830 - The Physics of Light: A comprehensive overview of the physics of light and its applications for lighting. The course uses a variety of instructional methodologies, including lectures, laboratory sessions, hands-on experimentation, and individual student projects and presentations to cover various areas of lighting study. Topics include geometric optics, physical optics, lighting calculations and measures, spectroradiometry, measurement techniques for advanced light sources, radiometry, and photometry.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LGHT 6940 - Advanced Individual Projects in Lighting: Individual projects and readings adapted to the needs of individual students at the advanced level.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
LGHT 6980 - Masters Project: Active participation in a masters-level project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a masters project report. The course is the culminating experience in the Masters of Science in Architectural Sciences with a Concentration in Lighting and the Masters of Science in Lighting. It is taught by faculty at the Lighting Research Center (LRC). The course allows students to work independently with a member of faculty to synthesize the information provided in formal course work by undertaking a masters-level  project in lighting. Grades of IP are assigned until the masters project has been approved by the faculty adviser. Grades will then be listed as S. If recommended by the adviser, the masters project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the library.Credit Hours: 1-9
LGHT 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
LITR 2110 - Introduction to Literature: A study of major literary works that introduces students to basic ideas and terminology in literary criticism. Students learn to read and interpret a selection of novels, plays, poetry, or other forms of writing to be determined each semester by the instructor. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 2150 - Contemporary Literature: Students explore the philosophical, political, and artistic grounds from which contemporary literature arises and develop their own creative capacities in a project related to the course readings.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 2420 - Art of the Film: A survey of selected films whose directors have contributed to the resources of the medium, as well as a study of technical and aesthetic considerations that distinguish film from other arts. Reading assignments in film history, techniques, scripts, and special research projects.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 2450 - Utopian Literature: An exploration of the use of fiction to propagate ideas about ideal or nightmarish societies. This course examines the artistic techniques employed in this distinct tradition and the unusual interplay between fiction and reality that this popular genre represents. Students work toward the design of their own utopian scheme in short story or other form. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 2770 - Women Writers: Women Writers examines creative works of literature produced by women of different times, such as novels, poetry, performance art, and graphic novels. These diverse works explore issues of personal identity and social responsibility that are complicated by different historical attitudes towards matters of gender, race, and class. Discussion and viewing of film and visual art will complement the courses focus on literature. This is a communication intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 2940 - Literature Studies: Readings and projects adapted to the needs of individual students.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 4150 - Science and Fiction: An exploration of the ongoing dialogue between science/technology and literature through the reading of landmark works about science and fictional works that describe scientific ideas and methods. Topics include artificial intelligence, genetic engineering, and cyborgs. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 4210 - Humor, Comedy, and Satire: Readings of literature from various periods in these three modes, including works by classical, renaissance, and contemporary writers. May include film, videos, and audio recordings.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: one literature course.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 4410 - Film Theory: The purpose of this course is to study significant theories of representation that analyze the visual codifications generically called film. The course will examine theories of visual rhetoric and of narrativity; look at the way economic and technological factors have affected the construction of cinematic codes, styles, and trends; examine influential psychoanalytic theories and feminist theories; and consider the ways in which popular films participate in the cultural narratives specific to their moment of production.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: any film course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 4960 - Topics in Literature: Experimental courses tried out in one or two terms.Credit Hours: 4
LITR 6940 - Literature Studies: Readings and projects adapted to the needs of individual students.Credit Hours: 3
LITR 6960 - Topics in Literature: Experimental courses tried out in one or two terms.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 1060 - Fundamentals of FlightA seminar based course providing an overview of the aerospace engineering field. Emerging and existing aerospace engineering technologies found in aircraft, rotorcraft, rockets, and spacecraft, and the engineering sciences relevant to aerospace engineering are introduced.
MANE 1090 - Introduction to Mechanics Hardware and Software: A laboratory introduction to simulation and hardware programming with MATLAB and Simulink.  Course covers: fundamental theory and programming tools for common sensors and actuators: gyroscopes, accelerometers, magnetometers, encoders, analog sensors, DC Motors, and motor drivers.  Including: discretization, sampling, integration, differentiation, delays, saturation, and control.  Material covered in a hands-on, observable, and application specific way.  Weekly 1 hour lab/lectures introduce basic topics.  Labs reinforce covered topics and are performed at home with provided hardware kits.When Offered: Spring term annually, fall term upon availability.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 1090.Credit Hours: 1
MANE 1100 - Introduction to Nuclear Engineering: A survey of concepts applied to nuclear power production and non-power application of nuclear science and technology. Topics include next generation nuclear power plants, nuclear reactor material, waste management, environmental impacts of nuclear power, fusion power, medical applications, radiation protection, and other topics of current interest. Introduction to and tours of experimental facilities including an electron accelerator and a low power nuclear fission reactor. Discussions of educational, research, and career opportunities in Nuclear Engineering.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1
MANE 2220 - Inventors Studio 1: An intermediate level course which enhances critical skills for leaders of technological innovation. Students would learn how to build on personal and innate talents through critical thinking skills, design-oriented mindsets, and an understanding of appropriate tool and process selection. Specifically, they would utilize tools and processes for ideation and innovation, develop ideas from concepts to minimum viable products (MVP) via the ideate - build - learn cycle, and recognize and understand a variety of prototyping methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2050 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 2400 - Fundamentals of Nuclear Engineering: Nuclear reactor systems and types; basic reactor physics, criticality calculations; fuel cycles; reactivity changes; reactor kinetics. Instrumentation and control; radiation protection. Reactor materials; shielding; energy removal. Reactor safety; economics. Waste management. Reactor design.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 2830 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 2830 - Nuclear Phenomena for Engineering Applications: A survey of atomic and nuclear phenomena and their application in various engineering disciplines. Systematics of atoms and nuclei; nuclear reactions and their characterization; radioactive decay; fission and fusion energy release; radiation effects on materials and biological systems; radiation production, detection, and protection. Applications in energy production, manufacturing, medicine, etc.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 1100 and CHEM 1100.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 2940 - Readings in Mechanical Engineering, Aeronautical Engineering, Nuclear Engineering, or Engineering Physics: Credit Hours: 1 to 3
MANE 2960 - Topics in Mechanical Engineering, Aeronautical Engineering, Nuclear Engineering, or Engineering Physics: Credit Hours: 3
MANE 2980 - Senior Project: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4010 - Thermal and Fluids Engineering II: Application of thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid flow principles to practical engineering systems, including power generation, HVAC, automotive design, materials processing, etc. Extends and complements concepts introduced in ENGR 2250. Utility of the 2nd Law will be demonstrated and emphasized.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  ENGR 2250.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4020 - Thermal and Fluids Engineering Laboratory: Laboratory experience to complement MANE 4010. Demonstration of principles of thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid mechanics for mechanical engineering applications through a number of structured experiments.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MANE 4010 must be taken either before or concurrently with MANE 4020.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 2
MANE 4030 - Elements of Mechanical Design: Introduction to the design of mechanical components and integrated assemblies. Loads, stresses, and strains. Failure phenomena and material selection. Mechanical components including shafts, couplings, bearings, gears, springs, clutches, brakes, screws and fasteners, and bonded joints.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2400, ENGR 2530.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4040 - Mechanical Systems Laboratory: Laboratory experience to complement MANE 4030. Tolerancing; gear kinematics and torque transfer; stress-strain behavior; beam bending; contact, friction, and wear; snap fasteners; fatigue; mechanical component design and analysis.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MANE 4030 must be taken either before or concurrently with MANE 4040.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 2
MANE 4050 - Modeling and Control of Dynamic Systems: Introduction to modeling, analysis, and control of dynamic systems. Modeling of mechanical, electrical, and electromechanical systems. Time-domain and Laplace-Transform solutions. Block diagrams and transfer functions. Analysis and design of feedback control systems. Control system representation and characteristics. System performance specifications. Absolute stability criteria. Root-Locus and frequency response analysis and design methods. Systems compensation and controller design.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisites: MATH 2400, PHYS 1200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4060 - Aerospace Structures and Materials: Beam structures under combined shear, bending, and torsional loads. Semi-monocoque structures: idealizations involving wings, ribs, and fuselage bulkheads. Effects of taper and cutouts in stiffened shell structures, shear deformations and warping, location of elastic axis in open and closed sections, torsion of multicell sections. Stability of beam and membrane elements. Introduction to materials used in aerospace vehicles including metals, ceramics, and composites with special emphasis on fiber-reinforced composite materials. Methods for material analysis and selection for various aerospace components.<span style="color:#FF0000; font-size:8.5pt"> Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2530.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4070 - Aerodynamics I: The fundamental principles of fluid dynamics, theory of inviscid incompressible flow, thin airfoils, high aspect ratio wings, delta wings, vortex panel and vortex lattice methods, subsonic compressible small-disturbance theory, transonic flow.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2250 and MATH 2010.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4080 - Propulsion Systems: Analysis of thrust generation from rockets, gas turbines, and propellers. Applications of one- and two-dimensional compressible flow to analysis of propulsion systems. Gas turbine component performance including diffusers and nozzles, turbomachinery, and combustors.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 4070 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4090 - Flight Mechanics: Performance, stability, and control of airplanes. General equations of motion for rigid aircraft, aerodynamic forces and moments, quasi-steady and nonsteady flight paths. Generalized performance methods, flight envelope. Small disturbance theory, stability derivatives, longitudinal and lateral static stability. Basic airplane motion, response to control actions and to atmospheric disturbances. Automatic flight control. Simulation of aircraft performance and dynamics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4070 or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MANE 4050.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4100 - Spaceflight Mechanics: Review of basic dynamics. Analysis of spacecraft trajectories, target rendezvous, and interception. Hohmann transfer, escape trajectories, interplanetary missions, the restricted three-body problem. Rigid body dynamics with application to gyrodynamics, stabilized platforms, gravity-gradient and spin stabilization of satellites, gyrostats. Selected topics such as drag-free satellites, vehicle launch and reentry, deployment dynamics (time permitting). MATLAB/Simulink is used as a simulation-visualization aid.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2090 and MATH 2400, or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4120 - Robotics I: A survey of the fundamental issues necessary for the design, analysis, control, and implementation of robotic systems. The mathematical description of robot manipulators in terms of kinematics and dynamics. Hardware components of a typical robot arm. Path following, control, and sensing. Examples of several currently available manipulators.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH2400 and either MATH2010 or ENGR1100.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE/CSCI 4480, ISYE 4960, ECSE 6470, and MANE 6120.Credit Hours: 3



MANE 4140 - Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics: This course provides an understanding of computational methods used in fluid dynamics, and hands-on experience in solving complex flow problems. Students will learn about computational fluid dynamics methods (finite volume method), write code, solve benchmark problems, and analyze the stability and convergence of algorithms. They will use CFD packages to solve problems motivated by complex engineering applications, learn how to represent geometry, mesh fluid volumes, and select models for turbulence.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2250, MATH 2010When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4170 - Machine Dynamics: The principles of dynamics as applied to the analysis of the accelerations and dynamic forces in machines and machine components such as linkages, cams, and gears. The effect these dynamic forces have on the dynamic balance and operation of the machines and the attending stresses in the individual components of the machines.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2090 and MATH 2400.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4180 - Mechanisms: The displacement, velocity, and acceleration analysis of planar mechanisms, four bar linkages, slider, cranks, cams, and gear systems. Some synthesis techniques. Explore the use of existing large and small computer graphics programs.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  ENGR 2090.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4190 - Bio-Fluid Mechanics: This course introduces the fundamental circulatory bio-fluid mechanics, blood rheology, and governing laws of physiological blood flows. The course emphasizes theoretical and numerical modeling, analysis and simulation, and demonstrates these methods through application of study cases and research in clinical applications. The topics will cover fundamentals of fluid mechanics and physical principles of circulation, blood rheology: properties of flowing blood, blood flow in vessels, veins, coronary arteries, microcirculation, models of biofluids, computational biofluid mechanics and fluid in the lung.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: 1.) Background of fundamental fluid dynamics  2.) Ordinary and partial differential equations.When Offered: Spring, every odd-numbered year.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 6190.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4200 - Rotorcraft Performance, Stability, and Control: Topics in flight dynamics generic to rotorcraft (e.g., helicopters and tilt-rotor VTOLs). Lift and propulsion systems, hovering, and forward flight characteristics. Dynamics of flapping rotors. Longitudinal and lateral trim. Dynamic flight stability, controllability, and basics of automatic control requirements.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4070 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4220 - Inventors Studio 2: Students work in teams to continue innovation, design and development work on approved projects that started in other courses such as Introduction to Engineering Design or Inventors Studio 1 or equivalent. New projects can also be proposed by students. Emphasis will be on innovating, completing the design, building an improved prototype, applying for patent protection, and licensing the design. Open to undergraduate and graduate students. Oral and written concept, mid term and final presentations are required. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: Invenotrs Studio 1 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4230 - Air Vehicle Design: Conceptual and preliminary design of manned and unmanned air vehicles to satisfy given mission requirements and aircraft specifications. Includes elements of initial sizing and weights, geometry selection, aerodynamic design, propulsion integration, stability and control, loads, structural design, materials, manufacturability, and cost analysis. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MANE 4060 and MANE 4090 and MANE senior standing.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4240 - Introduction to Finite Elements: An introductory course in use of the Finite Element Method (FEM) to solve one-and two-dimensional problems in fluid mechanics, heat transfer, and elasticity. The methods are developed using weighted residuals. Algorithms for the construction and solution of the governing equations are also covered. Students will be exposed to the use of commercial finite element software.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  ENGR 2250 or ENGR 2530 or ECSE 4160 and senior standing.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 4240. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 4240.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4250 - Mechatronic System Design: Mechatronic system design principles, modeling/ analysis/control (continuous and digital) of dynamic systems, control sensors/actuators and microcomputer/microcontroller interfacing, control electronics, and real-time programming for control. Lectures and weekly homework exercises; student teams complete two projects, each with required oral and written presentations; reverse engineering of a successful mechatronic system and a design-build-test exercise based on one of the laboratory systems of Mechatronics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4490.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4260 - Multidisciplinary Capstone Design: <span style="color:#000000; font-family:verdana,sans-serif; font-size:8.5pt">Acapstone design experience that engages students from biomedical, computer systems, electrical, industrial, materials, and mechanical engineering on teams in an open-ended engineering design problem in preparation for professional practice. With the guidance of a multidisciplinary team of faculty members and instructional support staff, students apply knowledge and skills from prior coursework. This is a communication intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2050 and senior standing.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 4900, ISYE 4270, and MTLE 4920. Students cannot obtain credit for this course and ECSE 4900, ISYE 4270, MTLE 4920.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4280 - Design Optimization: Theory and Practice: This course introduces the student to the theory and practical use of numerical design optimization methods, with a major focus on the practical problem formulations and results evaluation—relevant to engineering design. Optimal design topics include methods for unconstrained nonlinear problems, constrained linear and nonlinear problems, sensitivity analysis, multiobjective optimization, physical programming, and Pareto optimality. Some prior knowledge of MATLAB is helpful, but not required. MATLAB is used extensively. Most assignments require the use of a computer to generate numerical results using MATLAB. Use of a laptop in class is also required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 4030 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4330 - Inventors Studio 3: An advanced course in technology innovation, tools, and processes. Students will learn and practice Lean methodologies, expanding upon the ideate - build - validate - learn cycle, and will utilize systems thinking to design a Minimum Viable Product (MVP) of an Innovation. Additionally, they will leverage technical knowledge and skills to prototype and run a pilot manufacturing of a System or Sub System of an Innovation. Weekly seminars will be given by Innovators, Intrapreneurs and Entrepreneurs.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2050 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4340 - Physics of Radiology: An introductory course on physical principles behind the creation of diagnostic medical images. Medical imaging is one of the most exciting and technologically demanding fields of medicine. Topics include radiation interaction, radiation dosimetry, formation and quality of X-ray images, computed tomography (CT), nuclear medicine, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), ultrasound imaging, and radiation detection and safety. Current research on image quality optimization, image-guided radio-surgery, 3-D/4-D ultrasound imaging, and Monte Carlo simulations are reviewed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 2830 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4350 - Nuclear Instrumentation and Measurement: Nuclear instrumentation and radiation detector systems for the collection, processing and displaying of signals related to photons, electrons, alpha particles, and neutrons. Topics include: radiation interactions, counting statistics, ionization chambers, proportional counters, Geiger counters, scintillators, gamma-ray spectroscopy, semiconductor detectors, slow and fast neutron detection, liquid scintillation and TLD, and background and shielding. Students will tour a 100-MeV electron accelerator facility and learn to use MCNP code to simulate an HPGe gamma spectrometer.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 2830 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4360 - Introduction to Fusion Devices and Systems: Examination of the requirements and approaches for the commercial application of nuclear fusion. Discussion of fusion basics including fusion reactions, competing processes, energy balances, the need for plasmas, plasma confinement, and heating concepts. Analyses of fusion reactor embodiments based on magnetic and inertial confinement concepts. Identification of key physics, engineering, and technology issues associated with fusion development. Consideration of economics, environmental, and resource implications of fusion energy systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4370 - Nuclear Engineering Laboratory: A laboratory course covering topics in instrumentation, radiation detection and dosimetry associated with X-ray, gamma-ray, electron and neutron sources, applied physics,fluid dynamics, spectroscopy, neutron time of flight, and a project on shielding design using the MCNP code. Statistics of random events, error propagation, end error analyses are emphasized. Lab attendance is required along with formal written lab reports, which include data error analysis.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2600 and MANE 2830.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4380 - NEEP Senior Design Project I: This is the first of a two-semester sequence for seniors intended to be a “capstone” design project where students have the opportunity to utilize the broad range of their undergraduate experience in an interdisciplinary design project. Projects are selected to provide interaction between nuclear engineering and engineering physics majors to provide exposure to cross-fertilization of ideas and team interaction, which simulates anticipated future professional experience. The product of each design project is a comprehensive report or design proposal having both global and detail completeness. Under some circumstances, the project may involve development of cost information necessary to effect construction and may actually involve construction and commissioning of the designed apparatus. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
MANE 4390 - NEEP Senior Design Project II: This is a required continuation of MANE 4380. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
MANE 4400 - Nuclear Power Systems Engineering: Application of thermodynamics, heat transfer, and fluid flow principles to nuclear energy generation systems, including nuclear reactors, nuclear fusion devices and systems, and radiation technology. Engineering aspects of 1st and 2nd Laws of Thermodynamics will be emphasized. Characteristics and safety aspects of nuclear power equipment will be discussed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  ENGR 2250.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4410 - Applied Atomic and Nuclear Physics: Review of atomic and nuclear physics and quantum mechanics; application to atomic, molecular and nuclear systems; particle and photon emissions; photon/particle interactions; quantum statistics; field theory of electricity and magnetism; Maxwell equations in free space and within materials; applications to semiconductors, superconductors, accelerators, fusion systems, nuclear reactors; key measurements and databases.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  MANE 2830 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4420 - Radiation Technology: An introductory course on the generation, distribution, and interaction of ionizing radiation. Radiation sources such as radioisotopes, accelerators, focused ion beams, and cosmic rays are studied. Applications to semiconductor electronic devices, chemical polymerization, food preservation, sterilization, material modification, industrial and medical radiography, and radiation damage are presented.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 2830.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4440 - Critical Reactor Laboratory: Theory and operation of a low-power critical reactor facility: reactor layout, instrumentation, shielding, controls, hazards, problems of start-up and shutdown, and operating parameters. Approach to criticality, operating procedures, kinetics. Measurements are made of neutron flux, fuel rod worth, radiation, and various reactivity effects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4480.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4450 - Nuclear Fuel Management: Sources of nuclear fuel. Mining, milling, and purification. Principles of isotope enrichment; specific methods with emphasis on gaseous diffusion. Fuel fabrication. Transport and reprocessing of spent fuel. In-core fuel management. Linear reactivity, batch, nodal, and pincell methods. Power shape and control management. Partial core reloading. Fuel depletion. Poison management and Haling strategy. Breeding and fast reactors. Economics of the fuel cycle. Computation of fuel cycle costs.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 2400.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4460 - Engineering Materials for Nuclear Application: Nuclear environments and materials selection for nuclear applications; engineering materials utilized in light water reactors including fuels, cladding, structural materials, waste form materials and materials for next generation nuclear reactors. Specific topics include crystal structure, atomic bonds, defects in solids, thermodynamics, phase diagram, kinetic processes in materials diffusion, phase transformation, mechanical behavior of materials, and corrosion in nuclear systems; radiation effects due to neutrons and charged particles; properties of zircalloy; and high burn-up fuel.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ENGR 1600 Materials Science for Engineers.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: MANE 6380 Nuclear Reactor Materials.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4470 - Radiological Engineering: An introductory course on the principles of radiation and radiationprotection (health physics). Provides a fundamental understanding of radiation interactions in matter, the biological effects of radiation, internal and external dosimetry, occupational and environmental radiation protection, health physics instrumentation, regulations, waste management, risk assessment, and radiation shielding.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 2830 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4480 - Physics of Nuclear Reactors: Basic nuclear reactor theory; fuel cycles. Neutron diffusion and slowing down; criticality analyses for homogeneous and heterogeneous systems; reactor kinetics and control; reactivity coefficients; fuel management. Reactor systems and types; reactor design. Power plant safety.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 2400 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 4490 - Mechatronics: The synergistic combination of mechanical engineering, electronics, control engineering, and computer science in the design process. The key areas of mechatronics studied in depth are control sensors and actuators, interfacing sensors and actuators to a microcomputer, discrete controller design, and real-time programming for control using the C programming language. The unifying theme for this heavily laboratory-based course is the integration of the key areas into a successful mechatronic design.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2350, MANE 4050, and senior standing.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5 contact hours
MANE 4550 - Analysis of Manufacturing Processes: Review of basic aspects of manufacturing engineering including driving forces, quality attributes, tolerances, etc. Examination of basic principles of mechanics, engineering materials, analysis of both bulk-forming (forging, extrusion, rolling, etc.) and sheet-forming processes, metal cutting, and other related manufacturing processes. Discussion and role of computer-aided manufacturing in these areas.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2530 and MANE 4030.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4610 - Vibrations: Free and forced linear vibrations of damped and undamped mechanical and electrical systems of n degrees of freedom. Continuous system vibration. Manual and computer methods of finding natural frequencies, mode shapes, and final solutions. Self-and nonself-adjoint problems. Eigenfunction expansion. Integral transforms. Methods of approximating natural frequencies: Rayleigh quotient, Rayleigh Energy, Rayleigh-Ritz, Ritz-Galerkin, Holzer, Matrix iteration. Perturbation techniques. Stability criteria.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2090 or equivalent; MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4670 - Mechanical Behavior of Materials: Stress, strain, balance equations, elementary constitutive models. Elements of plasticity. Effect of temperature and deformation rate on mechanical behavior of engineering materials. Theory of dislocations. Deformation of metals and strengthening mechanisms. Creep behavior and viscoelastic models of material behavior.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2530.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4700 - Solar Devices and Renewable Energy: Solar irradiation, its nature, and its measurement. Insolation on tilted surfaces. Application of the principles of heat transfer and thermodynamics to the theoretical and experimental analysis of solar energy components used in the heating and cooling of buildings as well as hot water heating devices. Theoretical consideration of thermal storage devices, solar collectors, and solar-augmented heat pumps. Approximate techniques; other ongoing research topics.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4710 - Heat Transfer: Comprehensive treatment of conduction, convection (including boiling and condensation), and radiation heat transfer. Thermal system design and performance (including heat exchangers). Emphasis is on physical and mathematical modeling of engineering systems for application of modern analytical and computational solution methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4010 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4720 - Design and Analysis of Energy Systems: The course focuses on design and analysis of energy systems from accessibility (cost), availability (security/reliability) and acceptability (Environmental, health impacts etc). The course discusses various forms of energy sources, various forms of energy consumption. The life cycle analyses build on first principles and thermo-economic considerations. Methods of life cycle analyses from net energy, economics, and impact will be studied.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 4010.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4750 - Combustion Systems: Introduction to elementary theory of combustion and applications to energy sources, fires, and explosions. Discussion of internal and external combustion piston and turbine engines, solid-and liquid-propellant rockets, fire and explosion hazards of gaseous fuels, propellant and explosive performance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4010 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4760 - Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning: Principles for the control of air properties to meet comfort and industrial requirements, load determination, psychrometry, cycles, transmission, distribution, and automatic control.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite or corequisite: MANE 4010.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4800 - Boundary Layers and Heat Transfer: The Navier-Stokes equations and the boundary layer approximation. Exact solutions and integral methods of incompressible boundary layers. Transition; turbulence. Convective heat transfer in laminar and turbulent flow.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4070 or MANE 4010.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4830 - Acoustics Engineering: Solutions of acoustic wave and diffusion equations; stationary and moving monopole, dipole, quadrapole sources; geometrical acoustics; acoustical impedance, energy density, source strength, intensity flux; near and far field approximations; stationary and moving boundary interaction (viscous, dilational boundary layers, streaming, scattering). Applications include propeller, turbulent noise; total- and semi-anechoic chambers; loudspeakers; microphones, straight, tapered fluidic transmission lines; water hammer; musical instruments; room acoustics; sound absorbing, transmitting, and reflecting solid, liquid, gaseous media property determination.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2090 and MATH 2400.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4850 - Space Vehicle Design: Space vehicle designintroduces all elements of the spacecraft design process from proposal preparation through detailed specification and prototyping. Students are organized into design teams associated with different subsystems and tasks, to develop a solution to a space vehiclesystems problem of practical interest, by drawing on their background in aerospace engineering science, machine design, and manufacturing methods. Topics include problem definition and requirement analysis, design specifications, concept development, reliability, consideration of alternative solutions, materials considerations, engineering prototyping, mission analysis, and presentation skills. This is a communication-intensive and writing-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Seniors only.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4860 - Introduction to Helicopter Design: Aerodynamics and dynamics of lifting rotors. Design concepts by which rotor weight and stress are minimized and vehicle control is provided. Weight and engine power trends for configuration definition. Center of gravity and aerodynamic lift and moment for equilibrium and desired aircraft attitude. Methods for determining size, weight, and cost for a given payload, useful volume, and specified performance. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MANE 4200 Rotorcraft Performance, Stability, and Control and MANE senior standing.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4900 - Aeroelasticity and Structural Vibrations: Basic concepts in static and dynamic aeroelasticity. Structural vibrations, free and forced motion of discrete and continuous structures, introduction to modal analysis, and use of materials for dynamics tailoring. Aeroelastic behavior of complex structures, dynamic aeroelasticity. The phenomena of divergence, control surface effectiveness, and flutter and the use of composite materials for aeroelastic tailoring. The role of numerical methods will be emphasized.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2400 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 4910 - Fluid Dynamics LaboratoryWind tunnel experiments in fluid mechanics and the aerodynamics of airplane models with emphasis on lift, drag, separation and stall, transition and turbulence, longitudinal and lateral stability, and data acquisition and analysis. This includes pressure and velocity measurement techniques, hot wire anemometry, demonstrations of Particle Imaging Velocimetry, flow visualizations, tunnel characterization, laboratory instrumentation, errors and noise in measurements, digital sampling, and comparison of measured data with theoretical and computational predictions.<span style="font-size:12pt;font-family:'Times New Roman';">
MANE 4920 - Aerospace Structures and Control Laboratory: Laboratory experiments with primary emphasis on lightweight structures, structural dynamics, and control as it applies to aircraft and spacecraft. Experiments include elastic instability, linear and nonlinear structural vibrations, gyrodynamics, spacecraft stability, the role of materials (including composites), etc.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 4060.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
MANE 4940 - Individual Projects in Mechanical Engineering, Aeronautical Engineering, Nuclear Engineering, or Engineering Physics: Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3 to 6
MANE 4960 - Topics in Mechanical Engineering, Aeronautical Engineering, Nuclear Engineering, or Engineering Physics: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 5000 - Advanced Engineering Mathematics I: A presentation of mathematical methods useful in engineering practice. The course covers analytical and numerical techniques used in linear algebra, the numerical solution of nonlinear equations, the foundations of vector and tensor algebra and an introduction to vector operators. Also covered are methods of polynomial and trigonometric interpolation and approximation, numerical solution methods for initial and boundary value problems for ordinary differential equations and an overview of the fundamentals of probability and statistics including random variables, density and distribution functions and hypothesis testing. Symbolic manipulation and scientific computation software used extensively. Emphasis on reliable computing is made throughout.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 5060 - Introduction to Compressible Flow: One-dimensional isentropic compressible flow. Normal stationary and moving shock waves. Design on inlet and ducted diffusers, steady flow wind tunnels and shock tubes. Flow in ducts with friction and heat transfer.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 5080 - Turbomachinery: Representation of performance of turbomachines; mechanism of energy transfer; factors limiting design and performance including surge, choking, and cavitation; two-and three-dimensional flow phenomena; performance analysis including multistage effects and off-design performance.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 5100 - Mechanical Engineering Foundations I: A presentation of the principles of macroscopic transport useful in the analysis of mechanical engineering systems. The course covers the formulation energy mass and momentum balances in continua; the development of mathematical models of heat conduction and mass diffusion in solids and of flow in ideal and Newtonian fluids. Models are illustrated using examples from mechanical engineering. Particular attention throughout is devoted to the development of the ability to create realistic and reliable models.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6060 - Rotorcraft Performance, Stability, and Control: Topics in flight dynamics, generic to rotorcraft. Lift and propulsion system, hovering, forward flight. Longitudinal and lateral trim. Dynamic stability.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: MANE 4050.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6110 - Kinematic Synthesis: Analytical and geometrical theories of function, path, and motion generation of four bar linkages. Consists of 3, 4, and 5 accuracy points. Review of recent developments and use of computer graphic methods.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6120 - Robotics I: Elements of robot manipulators, mobility criteria, 3-D coordinate systems, matrix representation. Joint solutions and motion characteristics. Simulation on computer graphics. Hands-on experience of several robots and applications in industry.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6150 - Advanced Structural Analysis: Development and application of the variational formulation to structural dynamics problems involving effects such as rotary inertia, shear deformation, extensionality, and nonlinearities. Several papers published in the technical journals are also discussed during the semester.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6170 - Mechanics of Solids: This course provides an introduction to the mechanics of solids from a continuum perspective.Topics covered in this course include:vector and tensor analysis, coordinate systems and calculus in curvilinear coordinate systems, kinematics (motion, deformation and strain), stress and momentum balance, energy principles and balance laws, linear isotropic and anisotropic elasticity, thermoelasticity, method of solutions for 2-D and 3-D linear elastic boundary value problems, applications to simple structures.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 6170. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 6170.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6180 - Mechanics of Composite Materials: Mechanics of elastic heterogeneous solids. Plasticity of composite materials. Thermoelastic and thermoplastic behavior. Mechanics of distributed damage. Mechanical behavior.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: one graduate course in mechanics of solids.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 6180. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 6180.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6190 - Bio-Fluid Mechanics: This course introduces the fundamental circulatory bio-fluid mechanics, blood rheology, and governing laws of physiological blood flows. The course involves theoretical and numerical modeling of simple study cases and research in clinical applications. The main topics will cover Fundamentals of fluid mechanics and physical principles of circulation, Blood rheology: properties of flowing blood, blood flows in vessels, veins, coronary arteries, microcirculation, models of biofluids, computational biofluid mechanics, and fluid in the lung.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: 1.) Background of fundamental fluid dynamics  2.) ordinary and partial differential equations. When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as MANE 4910.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6200 - Plates and Shells: Preliminaries on linear, three-dimensional elasticity theory. Reduction of the elasticity theory to theories of plates and shells. Anisotropy. Nonlinear theories. Applications.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 6200. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 6200.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6210 - Structural Stability: Indicial and invariant notation, elements of variational calculus and nonlinear elasticity. Variational derivation of the linear stability equations for plates, rods, open thin-walled sections and cylindrical shells. Solutions of stability problems in each of these systems and development of approximation procedures.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 6210. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 6210.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6230 - Advanced Manufacturing Processes and Systems: Advanced Manufacturing Processes and Systems (AMP) is a project-based lecture/laboratory course that teaches graduate engineering students how to develop new manufacturing processes and systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: BS in Engineering, MANE 4550 or equivalent, and ENGR 4710 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall semester, annually.Cross Listed: ENGR 6120.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 6240 - Introduction to Neural Networks: Neural networks are program and memory at once, useful where traditional techniques fail, i.e., for artificial speech and image recognition. Emphasis on existing and emerging engineering applications. Parallel distributed processing, Hebbs rule, Hopfield net, back-propagation algorithm, perceptrons, unsupervised learning, Kohenen self-organizing map, genetic algorithms, neocognitron, adaline. Illustrated with computer programs and lectures.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ISYE 6870. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ISYE 6870.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6250 - Continuum Mechanics: General curvilinear coordinates, determinants, diagonalization of symmetric matrices, polar decomposition theorem. Description of finite deformation and motion, convected coordinates. Conservation equations, Cauchy and Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensors and equations of motion. Boundary conditions. Thermodynamics of continua, invariance principles, objective tensors. Constitutive equations, nonlinear elasticity, thermoelasticity, heat conducting fluids. Linearizations. Variational derivation of the equations of nonlinear elasticity.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6260 - Radiation Technology and Applications: An introductory course on the generation, distribution, and interaction  of ionizing radiation. Radiation sources such as radioisotopes,  accelerators, focused ion beams, and cosmic rays are studied.  Applications to semiconductor electronic devices, chemical  polymerization, food preservation, sterilization, material modification,  industrial and medical radiography, and radiation damage are presented.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 2830 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6270 - Environmental Radiation Safety Controls: Consideration and control of the health hazards peculiar to the atomic industry. Radiological units; exposure control; shielding; fallout; toxic materials; shipping and storage; waste disposal; legal aspects. Introduction to criticality hazards. Nonionizing radiation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  MANE 2400 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
MANE 6280 - Nuclear Reactor Analysis II: Reactor kinetics, stability, and control. Perturbation methods, reactivity coefficients; feedback mechanisms, long-term reactivity changes. Fission product effects on reactor startup and spatial stability. Fuel depletion. Theory of control and burnable poisons.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4480.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6290 - Radiation Transport Methods: Linear and nonlinear Boltzmann equations. Analytical solutions. Computer solution by P-N, S-N, diffusion, moments, integral, and Monte Carlo methods. Energy group averaging, scattering angle representation, and transport approximations. Perturbation and adjoint applications. Heavy ion and electron transport. Transport in interacting particle and photon systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4480.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6300 - Numerical Methods in Reactor Analysis: Difference equations; matrix operation, linear systems, matrix eigenvalue problems, multi-group diffusion, and transport theory methods. Sn calculations, Monte Carlo methods. Application to nuclear engineering calculations, such as flux and power distributions, heat conduction, programming reactor problems for digital computers, codes, etc.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MANE 4480, MATH 4600 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6310 - Reactor Design: The reactor design problem is studied using current methods. Emphasis is placed on thermal and hydraulic analyses of power reactors, neutronics, fuel cycles, economics, nuclear analysis, control, siting, and safety. Complete reactor systems are analyzed. Standard reactor design codes are utilized.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 2400 (may be concurrent).When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6320 - Radioactive Waste Management: Fundamental knowledge with a broad view on radioactive waste. Generation or sources, classification, management including treatment, conditioning, storage, transportation, and disposal. Environmental impact of nuclear waste management activities, risk and safety assessment, and regulatory aspects. Use of modern software (such as GoldSim) for risk and safety assessment through homework, project, and/or exams.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2400, MANE 2400, and MANE 4400 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6350 - Radiation Shielding: Design, analysis, and confirmation of radiation shields. Point kernel, removal-diffusion, P-N, discrete ordinates, and Monte Carlo computation method. Photon, neutron, and charged particle transport data, applications, and tests. Shield materials and behavior. Dosimetry in shield confirmation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4480.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6360 - Reactor Reliability and Safety: Theory and applications of reliability and risk assessment. Boolean algebra, logic diagrams, redundancy, and majority-vote configurations. System synthesis by reliability and fault tree techniques, quantitative evaluation, uncertainty analysis. Common cause events, failure data, and failure models. Allocation of risk to subsystems. Availability, repair policies, renewal theory. Operational reliability methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MANE 4050 and MATH 4600.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6370 - Thermal-Hydraulic Design of Nuclear Reactors: An introduction to the principles underlying the thermal-hydraulic design of nuclear power reactors. Topics include plant thermal limits, sub-channel analysis, thermal-hydraulic stability analysis, and reactor system response during both normal and postulated accident conditions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 6840 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6380 - Nuclear Reactor Materials: The physical metallurgy and associated physical chemistry of problems encountered in the application of materials in nuclear reactors is discussed. Specifically, the metallurgy and physical chemistry of ceramic fuels (e.g., oxygen potentials), the primary fuel densification and pellet-clad interaction mechanisms, irradiation-induced creep, hardening, and embrittlement mechanisms, and the properties of zircalloy are covered.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 4480.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6390 - Atomic and Nuclear Physics Applications: Principles and design of spectrometers and accelerators; NMR, ESR, Mossbauer methods, lasers, microwave devices, and combinations of these; sources, beam transport and focusing; targets and effects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4410.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6400 - Analytical Dynamics: A fundamental course in dynamics of rigid and flexible bodies. Review of kinematics and Newtonian dynamics; virtual variations and fundamentals of calculus of variations; generalized coordinates, velocities and momenta; constraints; generalized Hamilton’s principle and Lagrangean dynamics; rotational dynamics, orientation angles and Euler parameters; brief introduction to the analysis of nonlinear systems and stability of motion. Applications to the motion of rigid and flexible bodies. The role of symbolic manipulation in dynamics is introduced.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6420 - Multibody Dynamics: Analytical and numerical analysis of dynamic behavior of multibody mechanical systems. Emphasis on understanding all aspects of modeling and analysis process associated with real (spacecraft, automotive, biomechanical, etc.) systems. Review of traditional dynamic analysis methods (Newtonian-Euler, Lagrange, etc.), presentation of more efficient, powerful, recently developed methods (including Kane’s method). Comparison of the different formulations and their applicability to computer simulation. Treatment of constraints, extraction of data from equations of motion, and computational issues.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6430 - Nonlinear Vibrations: A fundamental course in nonlinear vibrations and stability. Basic concepts about linear and nonlinear systems; Routh-Hurwitz and Liapunovs stability criteria; systems with periodic coefficients and Floquet theory; effects of nonlinearities; limit cycles, jump, saturation, nonlinear resonances, modal energy exchange, etc.; perturbation methods: straightforward perturbations, Lindstedt-Poincare, harmonic balancing, multiple time scales; steady-state and transient responses of nonlinear systems. Applications to discrete and structural systems. Use of symbolic manipulation to analyze problems.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6450 - Mechanics of Materials Processing: Modeling and analysis of common manufacturing processes. Topics include bulk-forming, sheet-forming, and casting processes. Classical analysis techniques, upper bound analysis, slip-line field theory, asymptotic methods, and the finite element method are investigated.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 6170 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6460 - Fracture Mechanics and Fatigue of Materials: Fracture mechanics: linear elastic fracture, elastic crack boundary value problems, path independent integrals, stress concentration and crack nucleation, statistical approach to brittle fracture, toughening mechanisms, elastic-plastic fracture mechanics, elements of dynamic fracture. Fatigue of materials: response of materials under cyclic stress, micromechanical aspects of fatigue, phenomenological approach to fatigue life prediction, fracture mechanics approaches, fatigue crack initiation and propagation, variable amplitude, and overstress effects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  ENGR 2530, MANE 4670 or approval of instructor.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6480 - Health Physics and Medical Aspects of Radiation: Use of radioisotopes and radiation in nuclear medicine, radiation chemistry, basis of dosimetry, ionizing and nonionizing energy transfer processes in living tissue and cells. Radiation effects on the structure of nucleic acids, proteins, and cell membranes with emphasis on mechanisms by which cell viability is lost. Background in radiation chemistry is developed in particular for engineering majors. Applications are given in nuclear medicine, cancer therapy, and radiation in the environment.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6490 - Plasticity: Stress invariants. Polyaxial stress-strain relation for strain-hardening materials. Ideal plasticity, various yield conditions, and associated flow rules. Variational principles. Limit analysis. Applications in elastic-plastic stress analysis, metal forming, plastic collapse, and plastic instability.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6500 - Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics: Flow of non-Newtonian fluids such as polymeric liquids, granular mixtures, etc. Flow phenomena and material functions. Integral and differential constitutive equations for generalized Newtonian, linear viscoelastic, and ordered fluids.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6520 - Fluid Mechanics: An introductory graduate course in fluid mechanics. Topics include: continuum hypothesis; perfect gas and departures from perfect gas; vectors and tensors; conservation laws for a continuum: mass momentum and energy; constitutive theory for fluids; viscosity and molecular transport; compressible Navier-Stokes equations; kinematics of the flow field: vorticity, streamlines; incompressible Navier-Stokes equations and their applications: Poiseuille flow, low Reynolds number flows, flows at large Reynolds number, boundary layers, external flows: flow stability and introduction to the theory of turbulence.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Undergraduate multivariable calculus, undergraduate fluid mechanics.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6530 - Turbulence: Navier-Stokes equations, linear stability, vorticity and its origin, transition in wall-bounded and free-shear flows, statistics and Reynolds averaging, homogeneous turbulence, coherent structures, laboratory methods for study of turbulence, including turbulence measurements and turbulence modeling.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4800 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6540 - Advanced Thermodynamics: General principles and applications of equilibrium thermodynamics. Second law analysis of energy systems. Thermodynamic relations, equations of state, properties of single and multiphase systems. Elementary statistical thermodynamics. Fundamentals of nonequilibrium thermodynamics.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6550 - Theory of Compressible Flow: General equations of compressible flow. Specialization to inviscid flows in two space dimensions. Linearized solutions in subsonic and supersonic flow. Characteristic equations for supersonic flow with applications in external and internal flow. One-dimensional nonsteady compressible flow. Introduction to transonic flow.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4070 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6560 - Incompressible Flow: Graduate fluid mechanics course on classical and modern approaches to hydrodynamics. Topics cover three areas, (1) surface waves, (2) flow instability, and (3) vortex dynamics. Wave topics include linear dispersive and nondispersive waves, weakly nonlinear waves, and viscous effects, with special attention to surface tension phenomena. Flow instabilities include gravitational, capillary, thermal, centrifugal, and viscous instabilities. Topics in vortex dynamics include vortex laws and flow invariants, generation and decay of vorticity, and vortex-boundary interaction.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6570 - Aerodynamic Flow Control: This is a graduate level course. It is aimed to provide the students with the familiarity of traditional and modern flow control techniques. It also introduces the students to the subject of laminar-to-turbulent transition and flow separation using hydrodynamic stability analysis, which is a crucial component in design and implementation of intelligent flow control strategies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2250, MANE 4010, MATH 2400, or equivalents.  The course is offered only to graduate students.  Senior undergraduate students who wish to take this course must discuss it in person with the instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6600 - Systems Analysis Techniques: Methods of analysis for continuous and discrete-time linear systems.  Convolution, classical solution of dynamic equations, transforms and  matrices are reviewed. Emphasis is on the concept of state space. Linear  spaces, concept of state, modes, controllability, observability, state  transition matrix. State variable feedback, compensation, decoupling.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 4050 or ECSE 2410 or  equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6630 - Conduction Heat Transfer: An introduction to the mathematics of conduction heat transfer. Applications of results illustrated by examples from furnace design, cooling of electric components, building design, heat exchanger design.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6640 - Radiation Heat Transfer: An introduction to radiation heat transfer in diathermanous media and participating media. Selected applications from spacecraft design, furnace design, meteorology, temperature measurement, environmental control.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6650 - Convective Heat Transfer: Fundamental study of convection heat transfer in laminar and turbulent internal and external flows. Unsteady flows, combined heat and mass transfer, conjugated unsteady heat transfer, and buoyancy induced convection. Selected applications from aeronautics and heat exchanger design.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4800 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6660 - Fundamentals of Finite Elements: Graduate-level course on the fundamental concepts and technologies underlying finite element methods for the numerical solution of continuum problems. The course emphasizes the construction of integral weak forms for elliptic partial differential equations and the construction of the elemental level matrices using multi-dimensional shape functions, element level mappings, and numerical integration. The basic convergence properties of the finite element method will be given. This course serves as preparation for students working on finite element methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 2400 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 6660. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 6660.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6670 - Nonlinear Finite Element Methods: The formulations and solution strategies for finite element analysis of nonlinear problems are developed. Topics include the sources of nonlinear behavior (geometric, constitutive, boundary condition), derivation of the governing discrete equations for nonlinear systems such as large displacement, nonlinear elasticity, rate independent and dependent plasticity and other nonlinear constitutive laws, solution strategies for nonlinear problems (e.g., incrementation, iteration), and computational procedures for large systems of nonlinear algebraic equations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  CIVL 6660 or MANE 6660.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 6670. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 6670.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6680 - Finite Element Programming: Examines the implementation of finite element methods. Consideration is first given to the techniques used in classic finite element programs. Attention then focuses on development of a general geometry-based code which effectively supports higher order adaptive technique. Technical areas covered include: effective construction of element matrices for p-version finite elements, ordering of unknowns, automatic mesh generation, adaptive mesh improvement, program and database structures. Implementation of automated adaptive techniques on parallel computers is also covered.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  CIVL 6660, MANE 6660, CSCI 6860, or MATH 6860.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 6680. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 6680.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6700 - Finite Element Methods in Structural Dynamics: Solutions to the free vibration and transient dynamic responses of two-and three-dimensional structures by the finite element method are considered. The governing finite element matrix equations are derived and numerical aspects of solving these time-dependent equations considered. Topics include the formulation of the eigenvalue problem, algorithms for eigenvalue extraction, time integration methods including stability and accuracy analysis, and finite elements in time. Modal analysis and direct time integration techniques are compared for a variety of two-and three-dimensional problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  CIVL 6660 or MANE 6660.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 6700. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 6700.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6720 - Computational Fluid Dynamics: Course focuses on computational approaches to solve the Navier-Stokes equations. Course assumes knowledge of numerical methods and therefore directly attacks the obstacles to applying these methods to the Navier-Stokes equations. Issues concerning implementation of finite difference methods (FDM), finite volume methods (FVM) and finite element methods (FEM) will be discussed. These issues include: the discrete formulation, nonlinear equation iterator (steady)/marcher (time-accurate), linear equation formation, boundary condition prescription, and linear equation solution.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 6660 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6730 - Tribology: A basic course in tribology that covers both the fundamental and applied aspects of the subject. Content includes viscometry, the Reynolds equation, thrust and journal bearings (including design), thermal effects, dynamic loading and instability of bearings, rolling contact bearings, dry bearings, and theories of wear. This course includes design principles and data and is basic to other courses offered in tribology.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6750 - Generalized Finite Element Methods: Fundamentals of modern numerical techniques (e.g., partition of unity methods) which overcome longstanding difficulties associated with traditional FEM (e.g., mesh generation and resolution of singularities). Topics include scattered data interpolation, weighted residual methods, integral equation methods for exterior problems (applications to MEMS modeling), multiscale solution techniques using wavelets.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 4240 or CIVL 4240 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6760 - Finite Element Methods for Fluid Dynamics: Analysis of finite element methods for basic classes of problems in fluid mechanics. Starting with scalar transport equations and building to compressible and incompressible Navier-Stokes equations. Emphasis on developing and analyzing formulations that are stable and higher-order accurate such as Galerkin/least-squares methods and SUPG methods. Unsteady formulations are proposed using space-time methods and semi-discrete methods.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 6660.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6770 - Multiscale Computational Modeling: This course will introduce a unified approach of modeling in science and engineering across spatial and temporal scales using particles as well as continuum fields, specifically focusing on methods and algorithms that will facilitate this bridging. Topics include two categories of multiscale approaches: information-passing and concurrent-bridging approaches. The goal is to algorithmically develop these methods, and in the process teach the underlying simulation techniques. Applications to realistic problems will highlight the strengths of these approaches, while stressing the challenges that still need to be surmounted.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MANE 4240 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6780 - Numerical Modeling of Failure Processes in Materials: State of the art in computational modeling of failure processes in materials. Topics include numerical modeling of discrete defects, distributed damage and multiscale computational techniques including multiple scale perturbation techniques, boundary layer techniques, and various global-local approaches.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  CIVL 6660 or MANE 6660.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CIVL 6780. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CIVL 6780.Credit Hours: 3



MANE 6800 - Manufacturing Systems Integration: Examination of the basic elements that are used to integrate the design and manufacture of capital and consumer products; manufacturing information systems, CAD/CAM systems, and manufacturability considerations when integrating unit process operations.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6820 - Finite Deformation Plasticity: Theory and Applications Kinematics of Finite Deformation: Elastic-plastic and elasto-viscoplastic constitutive behavior for isotropic and strain-induced anisotropic materials. Integration algorithms and finite element formulations for solving practical problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MANE 6170 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6830 - Combustion: Review of fundamentals of thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, fluid mechanics, and modern diagnostics. Discussion of flame propagation, thermal and chain explosions, stirred reactors, detonations, droplet combustion, and turbulent jet flames. Introduction to computational tools for complex equilibrium and kinetic calculations. Application to problems such as pollutant formation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CHME 6830. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CHME 6830.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6840 - An Introduction to Multiphase Flow and Heat Transfer I: This course is intended to give students a state-of-the-art understanding about single and multicomponent boiling and condensation heat transfer phenomena. Applications include the analysis of nuclear reactors, oil wells, and chemical process equipment. Students satisfactorily completing this course are expected to thoroughly understand the current thermal-hydraulics literature on multiphase heat and mass transfer and be able to conduct independent research in this field.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: a working knowledge of fluid mechanics and heat transfer.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6850 - An Introduction to Multiphase Flow and Heat Transfer II: This course is intended to give students a state-of-the-art understanding in multicomponent flow phenomena. Applications in the chemical process, petroleum recovery, and fossil/nuclear power industries are given. Specific areas of coverage include two-phase: fluid mechanics, pressure drop, modeling and analysis, stability analysis, critical flow and dynamic waves, flow regime analysis, and phase separation and distribution phenomena.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CHME 6840 or MANE 6840.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CHME 6850. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CHME 6850.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6880 - Product Realization: Concepts and tools that enable engineers and business leaders to jointly make sound business/technology decisions in moving from ideas and designs to real products will be taught using lectures, cases, and a major project that will enhance the change of success of a new venture business. Topics: disciplined toll-gate processes, customer contract, technical risk management, design decisions, quality management, sourcing, product launch.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: engineering B.S. or MGMT 6040 and MGMT 6620 or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.
MANE 6900 - Seminar: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 0
MANE 6940 - Individual Projects in Mechanical Engineering, Aeronautical Engineering, Nuclear Engineering, or Engineering Physics: Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3 to 6
MANE 6960 - Topics in Mechanical Engineering, Aeronautical Engineering, Nuclear Engineering, or Engineering Physics: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A,B,C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
MANE 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a Master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
MANE 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
MANE 7000 - Advanced Engineering Mathematics II: A continuation of the advanced presentation of mathematical methods useful in engineering practice. The course covers the Frobenius method for the solution of boundary value problems; the representation of arbitrary functions by characteristic functions; calculus of functions of more than one variable including the study of extreme; overview of calculus of variations; principles of vector and tensor analysis; analytical and numerical techniques for the solution of initial and boundary value problems in partial differential equations. Symbolic manipulation and scientific computation software used extensively. Emphasis on reliable computing is made throughout.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 7100 - Mechanical Engineering Foundations II: A presentation of the most common physical and mathematical modes used in the description of the mechanical behavior of materials. The course covers the microstructural and thermodynamic foundations of constitutive material behavior of interest in mechanical engineering applications; overview of elasticity and plasticity and their relationship to microstructural features; principles of rheology; viscoelasticity and creep; failure mechanisms including fracture crack propagation and fatigue crack growth. Particular attention throughout is given to the development of the ability to utilize the mathematical models to assess the reliability and life of mechanical engineering components at the design state.Credit Hours: 3
MANE 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 15
MATH 1010 - Calculus I: Functions, limits, continuity, derivatives, implicit differentiation, related rates, maxima and minima, elementary transcendental functions, introduction to definite integral with applications to area and volumes of revolution.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 1020 - Calculus II: Techniques and applications of integration, polar coordinates, parametric equations, infinite sequences and series, vector functions and curves in space, functions of several variables, and partial derivatives.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 1010.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 1500 - Calculus for Architecture, Management, and HASS: Basic concepts in differential and integral calculus for functions of one variable. Topics will include functions, limits, continuity, derivatives, integration, exponential and logarithmic functions, and techniques of integration. Application areas will include topics in Management, Architecture, and Social Sciences with special emphasis on the role of calculus in introductory probability.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: major in Management, Architecture, or HASS.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 1520 - Mathematical Methods in Management and Economics: Functions of several variables, introductory linear algebra, and other analytical techniques needed for further study in probability, statistics, and operations research. Topics covered include improper integrals, probability density functions, partial derivatives and optimization techniques for functions of several variables, matrix algebra, linear systems, lines and planes in 3-space, linear inequalities, introductory linear programming, introductory combinatorics, and some probability.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 1010 or MATH 1500 and major in Management or Economics, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 1620 - Contemporary Mathematical Ideas in Society: An application-oriented course introducing contemporary mathematical concepts that pertain to areas of Architecture and Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences. The course will cover growth and form, symmetry, patterns, tilings, linear programming, information coding, voting systems, game theory, logic, probability, and statistics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: major in Architecture or Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences and MATH 1010 or MATH 1500 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 1900 - Art and Science of Mathematics I: A seminar for first-year math majors. The weekly student-faculty discussions will vary but examples of topics are: unsolved math problems, countability and the arithmetic of the infinite, topology and the concept of dimension, geometry and one-sided surfaces, and the theory underlying topics currently covered in calculus.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: first-year math majors.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
MATH 1910 - Art and Science of Mathematics II: A seminar for first-year math majors. The weekly student-faculty discussions will vary but examples of topics are: unsolved math problems, countability and the arithmetic of the infinite, topology and the concept of dimension, geometry and one-sided surfaces, and the theory underlying topics currently covered in calculus.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: first-year math majors.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1
MATH 2010 - Multivariable Calculus and Matrix Algebra: Directional derivatives, maxima and minima, double integrals, line integrals, div and curl, and Green’s Theorem; matrix algebra and systems of linear equations, vectors and linear transformations in R^n, eigenvectors and eigenvalues, applications in engineering and science.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 2400 - Introduction to Differential Equations: First-order differential equations, second-order linear equations, eigenvalues and eigenvectors of matrices, systems of first-order equations, stability and qualitative properties of nonlinear autonomous systems in the plane, Fourier series, separation of variables for partial differential equations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 1020 and some knowledge of matrices.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 2940 - Readings in Mathematics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATH 2960 - Topics in Mathematics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATH 4010 - Abstract Algebra: Groups, rings, polynomial rings, fields, integral domains, with emphasis on group theory; homomorphisms and isomorphisms; normal subgroups, cosets, ideals, modules; quotient groups and quotient rings; other topics chosen from number theory, polynomials and Galois Theory.  Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: familiarity with mathematical proofs.  MATH 4090 and MATH 4100 are recommended.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4020 - Introduction to Number Theory: Topics include the history of number representation systems, divisibility, greatest common divisor and prime factorization, linear Diophantine equations, congruences, and condition congruences. Additional topics may be chosen from cryptology, the perpetual calendar, hashing functions, computer operations and complexity, continued fractions, multiplicative functions, primitive roots, pseudo-random numbers, nonlinear Diophantine equations, Fermats last theorem, algebraic numbers, and approximation of numbers by rationals.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 1020.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4030 - Computability and Logic: This course covers basic concepts and results in mathematical logic and computability theory, including decision procedures, automated theorem proving techniques for truth-functional and first-order logic, axiomatizations of set theory and arithmetic, Turing Machines, Abacus Machines, recursive functions, the Church-Turing Thesis, the halting problem, undecidability of first-order logic, undecidability of arithmetic, and Godels incompleteness results.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHIL 2140 or CSCI 2200When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PHIL 4420. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PHIL 4420.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4040 - Introduction to Topology: Topics include general topological spaces, connectedness, compactness, continuity, and product spaces.  Additional topics may be chosen from identification spaces, homotopy, the fundamental group, covering maps, lifts, classification of surfaces, Baire category, dimension, and the Jordan curve theorem.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4090 or graduate standing or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4090 - Foundation of Analysis: The course provides an opportunity for the development of theorem-proving skills in the field of mathematical analysis.  Expansion of a knowledge base comes as a by-product of energy expended in theorem proving and subsequent exposition.  Analysis topics included are: sets, functions, the real numbers, cardinality, induction, decimal representations of real numbers, Euclidean spaces, abstract vector spaces, and metric spaces. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: mathematics major and MATH 2010When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4100 - Linear Algebra: The theory underlying vector spaces, algebra of subspaces, bases; linear transformations, dual spaces; eigenvectors, eigenvalues, minimal polynomials, canonical forms of linear transformations; inner products, adjoints, orthogonal projections, and complements.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2010.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4120 - Fundamentals of Geometry: Topics may be chosen from differential geometry of curves and surfaces, involutes and evolutes, order of contact, developable surfaces, Eulers and Meusniers Theorem, mean and Gaussian curvatures, geodesics and parallel transport, The Theorem Egregium of Gauss, Gauss-Bonnet Theorem, computer-aided geometric design, computational geometry, tessellations, tiling and patterns, projective and non-Euclidean geometries, postulates and axiomatic systems, advanced Euclidean geometry, and the history of geometry.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2010.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4150 - Graph Theory: Fundamental concepts and methods of graph theory and its applications to various areas of computing and the social and natural sciences. Topics include graphs as models, representation of graphs, trees, distances, matchings, connectivity, flows in networks, graph colorings, Hamiltonian cycles, traveling salesman problem, planarity. All concepts, methods, and applications are presented through a sequence of exercises and problems, many of which are done with the help of novel software systems for combinatorial computing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: CSCI 1100 and either CSCI 2200 or MATH 4090.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CSCI 4260. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CSCI 4260.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4200 - Mathematical Analysis I: Fundamental concepts of mathematical analysis. This is the first course in a two-term sequence covering such topics as the real number system, limits, sequences, series, convergence, uniform convergence, functions of one variable, continuity, differentiability, Riemann integration, Stone-Weierstrass Theorem, functions of several variables, trigonometric series, differential forms on manifolds, and the higher dimensional Stokes Theorem.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 1020 and MATH 4090 or graduate standing or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4210 - Mathematical Analysis II: Fundamental concepts of mathematical analysis. This is the second course in a two-term sequence covering such topics as the real number system, limits, sequences, series, convergence, uniform convergence, functions of one variable, continuity, differentiability, Riemann integration, Stone-Weierstrass Theorem, functions of several variables, trigonometric series, differential forms on manifolds, and the higher dimensional Stokes Theorem.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 4200 or graduate standing or permission of the instructor. When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4300 - Introduction to Complex Variables: Theory and Applications: An introduction to the theory and applications of complex variables. Topics include analytic functions, Riemann surfaces, complex integration, Taylor and Laurent series, residues, conformal mapping, harmonic functions, and Laplace transforms. Applications will be to problems in science and engineering such as fluid and heat flow, dynamical systems, and electrostatics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 2010 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4400 - Ordinary Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems: An intermediate course emphasizing a moderngeometric approachand applications in science and engineering. Topics includefirst-order equations, linearsystems, phase plane, linearization and stability,calculus of variations, Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics, oscillations, basic bifurcation theory, chaotic dynamics, and existence and uniqueness.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2010 and MATH 2400 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4500 - Methods of Partial Differential Equations of Mathematical Physics: An intermediate course serving to introduce both the qualitative properties of solutions of partial differential equations and methods of solution, including separation of variables. Topics include first-order equations, derivation of the classical equations of mathematical physics (wave, potential, and heat equations), method of characteristics, construction and behavior of solutions, maximum principles, energy integrals.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2010 and MATH 2400 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4600 - Advanced Calculus: A course emphasizing advanced concepts and methods from calculus.  Topics include: multivariable integral theorems (Greens, divergence, Stokes, Reynolds transport), extrema of multivariable functions (including Taylors theorem and Lagrange multipliers), the calculus of variations (Euler–Lagrange equations, constraints, principle of least action), and Cartesian tensors (calculus, invariants, representations).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2010.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4700 - Foundations of Applied Mathematics: Mathematical formulation of models for various processes. Derivation of relevant differential equations from conservation laws and constitutive relations. Use of dimensional analysis, scaling, and elementary perturbation methods. Description of basic wave motion. Examples from areas including biology, elasticity, fluid dynamics, particle mechanics, chemistry, geophysics, and finance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 2400 is required, and MATH 2010 is recommended.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4720 - Mathematics in Medicine and Biology: An introduction to mathematics used in biology, biophysics, biomedical engineering, and medicine. The mathematical topics covered are selected from calculus, linear algebra, differential equations, numerical methods, and Fourier analysis. The biological applications covered are selected from human physiology (heart, lung, brain), population models (microorganisms, cells, animals), and the diagnosis and treatment of disease (heart, cancer).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 1020.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4740 - Introduction to Financial Mathematics and Engineering: This course is designed to introduce students to mathematical and computational finance. Topics include a mathematical approach to risk analysis, portfolio selection theory, futures, options, and other derivative investment instruments. Finite difference and finite element methods for computing American option prices are discussed. A working knowledge of MAPLE or MATLAB is required to compute optimal portfolios.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4800 - Numerical Computing: A survey of numerical methods for scientific and engineering problems. Topics include numerical solution of linear and nonlinear algebraic equations, interpolation and least squares approximations, numerical integration and differentiation, eigenvalue problems, and an introduction to the numerical solution of ordinary differential equations. Emphasis placed on efficient computational procedures including the use of library and student written procedures using high-level software such as MATLAB.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2010 and MATH 2400.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CSCI 4800. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CSCI 4800.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4820 - Introduction to Numerical Methods for Differential Equations: Derivation, analysis, and use of computational procedures for solving differential equations. Topics covered include ordinary differential equations (both initial value and boundary value problems) and partial differential equations. Runge-Kutta and multistep methods for initial value problems. Finite difference methods for partial differential equations including techniques for heat conduction, wave propagation, and potential problems. Basic convergence and stability theory.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CSCI 4820. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CSCI 4820.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4840 - Numerical Linear Algebra with Applications: <p style="margin-left:0in; text-align:left">The focus of the course is on fundamental algorithms in computational linear algebra and their applications in science and engineering. These algorithms involve QR and SVD factorizations, the computation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors, basic optimization methods, and iterative methods for sparse systems. Applications will be considered in areas such as data analysis and compression, principal component and spectral analysis, solutions of large sparse systems, among others.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MATH 4800.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.
MATH 4940 - Readings in Mathematics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATH 4950 - Senior Research: Undergraduate mathematics projects that utilize students mathematical knowledge will result in formal reports and final presentations. Examples are research projects or critical in-depth mathematical literature reviews. Information about projects will be exchanged in weekly meetings. Students wishing to work on research should make arrangements with faculty in advance. Students already engaged in research may extend and present their results. This is a communication-intensive course. To be graded S/U.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: open to mathematics seniors only.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 4960 - Topics in Mathematics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATH 4980 - Undergraduate Project in Mathematics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATH 6190 - Topics from Pure Mathematics: The course is intended to provide a mathematical perspective on one or more topics chosen from algebra, geometry, and/or topology. Topics may include combinatorial matrix theory, classification of surfaces, Lie groups, Galois theory, geometric analysis, computational geometry, homology, and/or fixed point theorems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: vary with topic.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6200 - Real Analysis: A careful study of measure theory, including abstract and Lebesgue measures and integration, absolute continuity and differentiation, L^p spaces, Fourier transforms and Fourier series, Hilbert spaces and normed linear spaces.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4210 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6220 - Introduction to Functional Analysis: A basic course in the concepts of linear functional analysis, including such topics as linear functionals, bounded linear operators, unbounded linear operators, graphs, adjoints, spectral theory of linear operators, and applications to differential equations and mathematical physics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 4210, MATH 4300, or permission of instructor; MATH 6200 or equivalent also desirable.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6240 - Functional Analysis and Analysis for Nonlinear Operators: A continuation of material presented in MATH 6220. Covers such topics as inverse and implicit function theorems, fixed point theorems, Riesz bases, distributions and Sobolev spaces, variational methods, degree theory, and applications to differential equations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 6220 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6300 - Complex Analysis: A basic graduate course covering Cauchys Theorem, residues, infinite series and products, partial fractions, conformal mapping and the Riemann mapping theorem, analytic continuation, zeros and growth of analytic functions, approximation by rational functions, Phragmen-Lindelof Theorems, inverse-scattering theory, elliptic functions, and Riemann Surfaces.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  MATH 4210 and MATH 4300 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6400 - Ordinary Differential Equations: A basic graduate course introducing the fundamental concepts of modern evolution equations theory in the setting of ordinary differential equations. Topics include existence and uniqueness, integral equations, stability of equilibria, stable manifolds, Floquet theory, Poincare-Bendixson theory, bifurcation theory, center manifolds, normal forms, averaging theory, Hamiltonian mechanics and calculus of variations, chaotic dynamics, KAM theory, and soliton theory.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4400 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6490 - Topics in Ordinary Differential Equations: Mathematical foundations and/or applications of ordinary differential equations. Possible topics include: stability and chaos in dynamics, mathematical methods of classical mechanics, stochastic differential equations, and soliton equations. Listing of topics offered to date.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: vary with topic.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6500 - Partial Differential Equations: A course dealing with the basic theory of partial differential equations. It includes such topics as properties of solutions of hyperbolic, parabolic, and elliptic equations in two or more independent variables; linear and nonlinear first order equations; existence and uniqueness theory for general higher order equations; potential theory and integral equations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4210 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6590 - Topics in Partial Differential Equations: Mathematical foundation and/or applications of partial differential equations. Possible topics include soliton theory and applications, wavelets and PDEs, scattering theory, hyperbolic conservation laws.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: vary with topic.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6600 - Methods of Applied Mathematics: Linear vector spaces; eigenvalues and eigenvectors in discrete systems; eigenvalues and eigenvectors in continuous systems including Sturm-Liouville theory, orthogonal expansions and Fourier series, Greens functions; elementary theory of nonlinear ODEs including phase plane, stability and bifurcation; calculus of variations. Applications will be drawn from equilibrium and dynamic phenomena in science and engineering.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2400 and MATH 4600.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6620 - Perturbation Methods: This course is devoted to advanced methods rather than theory. Content includes such topics as matched asymptotic expansions, multiple scales, WKB, and homogenization. Applications are made to ODEs, PDEs, difference equations, and integral equations. The methods are illustrated using currently interesting scientific and engineering problems that involve such phenomena as boundary or shock layers, nonlinear wave propagation, bifurcation and stability, and resonance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  MATH 2400 and MATH 4600 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6640 - Complex Variables and Integral Transforms with Applications: Review of basic complex variables theory; power series, analytic functions, singularities, and integration in the complex plane. Integral transforms (Laplace, Fourier, etc.) in the complex plane, with application to solution of PDEs and integral equations. Asymptotic expansions of integrals (Laplace method, methods of steepest descent and stationary phase), with emphasis on extraction of useful information from inversion integrals of transforms. Problems to be drawn from linear models in science and engineering.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 4600 and familiarity with elementary ordinary and partial differential equations.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6660 - Stochastic Processes and Modeling: A course which will introduce methods and concepts to model and analyze the dynamics of system with uncertain inputs or too many variables to track explicitly. Topics may include Markov processes, point processes, renewal processes, and/or stochastic differential equations. Applications will be developed and illustrated on examples drawn from physics, biology, chemistry, industry, and finance. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2400.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6740 - Financial Mathematics and Simulation: This course is the second mathematical and computational finance course in a new one-year sequence for mathematics, DSES and engineering majors, and graduate students. It will cover the basics of stochastic processes, and current methods in the simulation of stochastic problems such as Monte Carlo algorithms and variance reduction tools. It will also focus on teaching the application of these stochastic simulation methods to finance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4740.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6790 - Topics in Applied Mathematics: Advanced methods and/or applications of mathematics. Possible topics include: nonlinear continuum mechanics, nonlinear waves, inverse problems, nonlinear optics, combustion, acoustic wave propagation, similarity methods for differential equations, quantum field theory and statistical mechanics, stability of fluid flows, biomathematics, and finance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: vary with topic.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6800 - Computational Linear Algebra: Gaussian elimination, special linear systems (such as positive definite, banded, or sparse), introduction to parallel computing, iterative methods for linear systems (such as conjugate gradient and preconditioning), QR factorization and least squares problems, and eigenvalue problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CSCI 6800. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CSCI 6800.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6820 - Numerical Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations: Numerical methods and analysis for ODEs with applications from mechanics, optics, and chaotic dynamics. Numerical methods for dynamical systems include Runge-Kutta, multistep and extrapolation techniques, methods for conservative and Hamiltonian systems, methods for stiff differential equations and for differential-algebraic systems. Methods for boundary value problems include shooting and orthogonalization, finite difference and collocation techniques, and special methods for problems with boundary or shock layers.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CSCI 6820. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CSCI 6820.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6840 - Numerical Solution of Partial Differential Equations: Numerical methods and analysis for linear and nonlinear PDEs with applications from heat conduction, wave propagation, solid and fluid mechanics, and other areas. Basic concepts of stability and convergence (Lax equivalence theorem, CFL condition, energy methods). Methods for parabolic problems (finite differences, method of lines, ADI, operator splitting), methods for hyperbolic problems (vector systems and characteristics, dissipation and dispersion, shock capturing and tracking schemes), methods for elliptic problems (finite difference and finite volume methods).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800 or permission of Instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CSCI 6840. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CSCI 6840.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6860 - Finite Element Analysis: Galerkins method and extremal principles, finite element approximations (Lagrange, hierarchical and 3-D approximations, interpolation errors), mesh generation and assembly, adaptivity (h-, p-, hp-refinement). Error analysis and convergence rates. Perturbations resulting from boundary approximation, numerical integration, etc. Time dependent problems including parabolic and hyperbolic PDEs. Applications will be selected from several areas including heat conduction, wave propagation, potential theory, and solid and fluid mechanics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4800 or CSCI 4800 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as CSCI 6860. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and CSCI 6860.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6890 - Topics in Computational Mathematics: Advanced methods and/or applications in scientific computing. Possible topics include computational fluid dynamics, parallel computing, computational acoustics, and computer applications in medicine and biology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: vary with topic.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
MATH 6940 - Readings in Mathematics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATH 6950 - Teaching Seminar for Teaching Assistants: A seminar required for first-year TAs in mathematics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  first-year math TA.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
MATH 6951 - Introduction to Research in Mathematics: This seminar introduces first-year graduate students in mathematics to the faculty and their research. Each week a different faculty member from math will give introductory presentations of their current research areas in a setting that is conducive for significant student-faculty discussions of the material.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate student in mathematics.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 1
MATH 6960 - Topics in Mathematics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATH 6970 - Master’s Practicum in Mathematics: Active participation in a professional experience in mathematics, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Master’s Practicum may serve as the capstone professional experience for the M.S. degree. A Master’s Practicum may result in documentation as required by the adviser, but is not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and is not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned if credit is awarded for the Master’s Practicum.Credit Hours: 0 to 6
MATH 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
Math 6990 - Masters ThesisActive participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a masters thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presented, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.
MATH 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Educationl to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
MATP 4400 - Introduction to Data Mathematics: This course will center on applications of basic data analysis techniques such as data visualization, classification, clustering, and ridge regression. A case study approach will be used to provide immediate immersion into the problem of understanding high-dimensional data. The course will develop the necessary mathematics to understand and execute the techniques. Each student will execute a mini-data analysis project on a real-world data problems such as from engineering, medicine, and business.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 1010 and CSCI 1100.When Offered: Spring term annually.Graded: Grades will be based on the weekly homework, in-class labs, two projects, and two in-class exams.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: none
MATP 4450 - Data Analytics: The world at-large is confronted with increasingly larger and complex sets of structured/unstructured information; from cyber and human sources. Traditional enterprises are moving toward analytics-driven approaches for core business functions. Data and information analytics extends analysis (descriptive models of data) by using data mining and machine learning methods, with optimization and validation, to recommend action or guide and communicate decision-making. Thus, analytics in an entire methodology rather than individual analyses or analysis steps.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite preferences:  Data Science ITWS/CSCI/ERTH 4350, Foundations of Data Science CSCI 49xx or permission of instructor. Database experience (pref). Script programming (pref).When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ITWS 4600 and ITWS 6600.  Students may not receive credit for both MATP 4450 and ITWS 4600/6600.Credit Hours: 3
MATP 4600 - Probability Theory and Applications: Axioms of probability, joint and conditional probability, random variables, probability density and distribution functions, expectation, functions of random variables, and limit theorems. Applications of probability to models in operations research, including queuing theory and Markov chains.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATH 1020 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATP 4620 - Mathematical Statistics: A course in the theory of statistics that will provide students with a basic foundation for more specialized statistical methodology courses. Topics include sampling and sampling distributions; point estimation including method of moments, maximum likelihood estimation, uniform minimum variance estimation, and properties of the associated estimators; hypothesis testing including uniformly most powerful, likelihood ratio, chi-square goodness-of-fit tests, and tests for independence. The course concludes with an introduction to linear statistical models.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MATP 4600 or equivalent calculus-based course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ISYE 4760. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ISYE 4760.Credit Hours: 4
MATP 4700 - Mathematical Models of Operations Research: Introduction to deterministic models of operations research including linear programming formulations, the simplex algorithm, degeneracy, geometry of convex polyhedra, duality theory, and sensitivity analysis. Special linear programming models for assignment, transportation, and network problems. Integer programming formulations along with branch and bound solution. Dynamic programming.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2010When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATP 4820 - Computational Optimization: An introduction to nonlinear programming. Models, methods, algorithms, and computer techniques for nonlinear optimization are studied. Students investigate contemporary optimization methods both by implementing these methods and through experimentation with commercial software. Nonmajors wishing to gain practical optimization skills are welcomed in this course. A course project will allow students to explore optimization methods and practical problems directly related to their interests.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 2010 or ENGR 1100, and CSCI 1100 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATP 6610.Credit Hours: 4
MATP 4940 - Readings in Mathematical Programming, Probability, and Mathematical Statistics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATP 4960 - Topics in Mathematical Programming, Probability, and Mathematical Statistics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATP 4980 - Undergraduate Project in Mathematical Programming, Probability, and Mathematical Statistics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATP 6600 - Nonlinear Programming: Convex sets and functions, optimality conditions in nonlinear programming, Lagrangian duality, quadratic programming; algorithms for nonlinear programming including Newtons method, quasi-Newton methods, conjugate gradient methods, together with proofs of convergence.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATH 4200 or equivalent or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ISYE 6780. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ISYE 6780.Credit Hours: 4
MATP 6610 - Computational Optimization: An introduction to nonlinear programming. Models, methods, algorithms, and computer techniques for nonlinear optimization are studied. Students investigate contemporary optimization methods both by implementing these methods and through experimentation with commercial software. Nonmajors wishing to gain practical optimization skills are welcomed in this course. A course project will allow students to explore optimization methods and practical problems directly related to their interests. A computer implementation and a research presentation will be required. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and MATP 4820.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATP 6620 - Combinatorial Optimization and Integer Programming: Exact and heuristic methods for solving discrete problems, including the traveling salesman problem, the knapsack problem, packing and covering problems. Algorithm complexity and NP-completeness, cutting plane methods and polyhedral theory, branch and bound, simulated annealing, tabu search, Lagrangian duality.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATP 4700.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ISYE 6760. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ISYE 6760.Credit Hours: 4
MATP 6640 - Linear Programming: A unified development of linear systems and linear programming, polyhedral theory, the simplex method, interior point methods, decomposition methods for large-scale linear programming problems, the ellipsoid method, column generation algorithms for stochastic programming, and other problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MATP 4700.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ISYE 6770. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ISYE 6770.Credit Hours: 4
MATP 6940 - Readings in Mathematical Programming, Probability, and Mathematical Statistics: Credit Hours: 1 to 4
MATP 6960 - Topics in Optimization: Advanced methods and/or applications in optimization. Possible topics include stochastic programming, learning theory, cone programming, optimization of medical treatment, and network flows.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: vary with topics and/or instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MATP 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Graded: Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 6
MGMT 1100 - Introduction to Management: This is a required first course for management majors and minors. In a case-based format, it emphasizes broad, basic principles of managerial functions and processes using an interdisciplinary approach to goal-oriented situations of private and public organizations.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 1240 - Management Professional Development 1: The course is the first in a two part series of Professional Development Workshops that teach practical skills to enhance business students readiness to enter the professional world and achieve workplace success and a high degree of professionalism. The course emphasizes the following themes: personal values and self-awareness, leadership and followership, ethics, basic oral presentation skills.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 2
MGMT 1250 - Management Professional Development 2: The course is the second in a two part series of Professional Development Workshops that teach practical skills to enhance business students readiness to enter the professional world and achieve workplace success and a high degree of professionalism. The course emphasizes the following themes: professional oral and written presentation, professional goal setting, feedback giving and receiving, conflict and business ethics, networking, and meeting management.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 2
MGMT 1260 - Business Law and Ethics: This course focuses on legal and ethical considerations in management. Topics include torts, contracts, criminal and property law, constitutional and administrative law, dispute resolution, business formation, and equal opportunity. Students will also develop an awareness of ethics in managerial decision making, including recognizing and analyzing ethical issues in the workplace, promoting ethical behavior in corporations and recognizing social responsibilities of business.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 2100 - Statistical Methods: This course develops an understanding of concepts in business statistics and focuses on application of concepts in problem-solving situations. In particular, students learn to present and describe data, analyze probability distributions, make statistical inferences based on data samples, and develop models for prediction and forecasting.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 1500 and MATH 1520.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 2150 - Accelerated Business Statistics: This course develops an understanding of concepts in business statistics and the application of concepts in problem-solving situations. Students learn to present and describe data, make statistical inferences, and develop models for prediction and forecasting. Work is accompanied by use of software (Excel) and a course project ensures that concepts are properly applied. This fast-paced course assumes students have a good understanding of foundational mathematics and the ability to quickly grasp quantitative content. Students cannot earn credit for both MGMT 2100 and MGMT 2150.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MATH 1500 and MATH 1520.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4



MGMT 2300 - Financial AccountingAn introduction to the basic concepts and standards underlying financial accounting systems. Several important concepts will be studied in detail, including: revenue recognition, inventory, long-lived assets, long term liabilities, and equity. The course emphasizes the construction of the basic financial accounting statements - the income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statement - as well as their interpretation.
MGMT 2320 - Managerial Finance: An introduction to corporate financial analysis and decision making. This course covers the following topics: financial statement analysis, valuation principles, risk and return analysis, working capital management, capital budgeting, cost of capital, capital structure, and dividend policy.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  MGMT 2100 or ENGR 2600, and MGMT 2300.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 2430 - Marketing Principles: This course provides students with an understanding of marketing principles and the role of the marketing discipline. The course is intended to help students learn the basic concepts and practices of marketing and to familiarize them with the terminology and techniques for properly framing and analyzing marketing problems. In addition to marketing concepts, processes, and strategy, issues such as the social consequences of marketing are discussed.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 2510 - Microcomputers and Applications: An introduction to the fundamentals of microcomputer technology and its application in management and information systems. Through hands-on exercises students will develop competencies in working with data through spreadsheets applications and relational databases. Topics include foundational concepts in information systems, spreadsheets and basic data modeling and database design.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5 contact hours
MGMT 2600 - International Business: The course provides an introduction and an overview of international business. Topics in the course include (a) globalization of markets and firms, (b) political, economic, and cultural differences across countries,  (c) theories and trends in international trade and investment, (d) strategies and operations of firms in international markets, and (e) global aspects of marketing, R&amp;D, human resource management, accounting, and finance.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 2940 - Studies in Management: Student plans a course of selected topics in management theory or practice not listed in this catalog. The instructor who will supervise and grade the student must approve the plan. Lectures, discussions, conferences, or seminars may be used in conjunction with the independent study.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 1 to 4 per course, not to exceed 12 for this course number
MGMT 2960 - Topics in Management: Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4070 - Personal Finance: The course takes a comprehensive look at financial planning at the individual level. As such, it provides guidelines and principles for credit management, debt management, investment management, risk management. Taxes, insurance, and retirement strategies also receive prominent attention. Financial planning will be couched in terms of the current state of markets and economies and potential changes in them. The course will be useful across the spectrum of the tactical to the strategic; across that of the short-term to the long-term; that of accumulation of wealth to ultimate disposition of assets and wealth; that of investment to lifestyle; and that of good deals to scams.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: MGMT 6070. Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4080 - Networks and Value Creation: Increasingly the competitive landscape in many industries is shaped not only by individual firm competencies but more by those of the extended value networks that organizations are part of. The course focuses on how value networks for demand fulfillment can be designed and managed. Key concepts related to how inter-enterprise integration and value chain constellations can be deployed to effectively detect and fulfill customer needs in a cost-efficient manner. The course will also examine several sourcing strategies and their suitability and economics for different types of products and services.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 4100 Quantitative Methods.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with MGMT 6080. Students may not receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4100 - Quantitative Methods for Business: This course introduces the student to the business management of production and operations systems. The concepts are related to inventory control, forecasting, scheduling, man-powers, and facilities planning. Computer usage includes Excel and specialized packages.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4110 - Operations Management: This course introduces the student to the operations function in services and manufacturing-oriented firms. Students develop an appreciation of the concepts, principles, and techniques used for decision making in the operations function. The course takes a managerial perspective.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MGMT 2100.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4130 - Enterprise IT Integration: This course explores a multitude of approaches to IT integration among the various departments of a corporation as well as between the corporation and entities in its external environment. It explores multiple integration methods at the data level, the process level, and the application level. Once the student acquires a strong understanding of these basic methods then the course continues with advanced methods of IT integration. Such methods include Service Oriented Architectures (SOA), Fast Business to Business methods, Middleware methods, Cloud Computing, Supply Chain, and Portal based integration. The course is case study taught using the latest case studies from various consulting companies as they have actually implemented solutions for their corporate customers.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 2300 or equivalent or MGMT 4240 or equivalent, or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4140 - Computer Information Systems: This course provides the undergraduate management student with an introduction to the concept and components of computer-based “management information systems” (MIS) and their integration into organizational processes to gain competitive advantage. This course will examine approaches for developing and using information systems in support of business processes. Topics include: the impact of computer-based information systems on organizations; the basic technology components of modern information systems; the process by which information systems are created and changed; and selected management and technology issues.When Offered: Fall and spring terms anually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4150 - IT Project Management: This capstone concentration course provides the student with conceptual and applied material focusing on the effective implementation of information. A central theme underlying this course is that information system implementation is best thought of as a bridge between systems design and utilization and that it must be understood in the context of the development process as a whole. The course examines a wide array of interrelated issues not generally covered in a systems analysis and design course including: process development life cycle; project management and systems engineering; process reengineering and maturity; organizational learning and evaluation.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4170 - Data Resource Management: This course introduces both technical and managerial aspects of a wide range of data-driven technologies used by modern organizations to solve business problems.  This course provides the fundamental technical data management skills expected of any MIS professional as well as improved knowledge and understanding of the managerial issues that arise in applying different data management technologies to business problems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MGMT 4140 or permission from instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4220 - Accounting Information Systems: This course provides the background for understanding how the accounting system works and also how the accounting system fits into the overall information system of the firm.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MGMT 2300.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4230 - Cost Accounting: This course is the upper level of managerial accounting course. Cost accounting provides information for both managerial accounting and financial accounting. It is useful for managers for planning and controlling, as well as costing products, services, and customers.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 2300 with at least a grade of C.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4240 - Systems Analysis and Design: This course presents conceptual material on the analysis and design of business information systems. The focus is on understanding business information processing requirements and developing information systems solutions to meet these requirements. Key stages of the systems development life cycle including planning, analysis, and design are the focus of this course. Models and procedures for understanding and modeling an organizations existing and planned information systems are presented. Computer-aided software engineering tools are used to provide hands-on experience in designing information systems.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4250 - Managerial Accounting: This course focuses on the principles of managerial accounting, in three major areas: 1) how managerial behavior influences costs; 2) how managers use accounting information to make strategic decisions; and 3) how to evaluate and control managerial actions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 2300.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: MGMT 6210.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4260 - Financial Statement Analysis: This course is designed to strengthen students ability to correctly analyze, interpret, and evaluate financial statements and their accompanying disclosures.The course is aimed at anyone whose career might involve working with accounting data, and should be especially useful for those interested in consulting and financial analysis.Throughout the semester the course will cover how to use financial accounting information for evaluating past performance and predicting future performance of a company or division. The course revolves around a number of topics of recent interest to the business community including accounting and financial analysis, performance forecasting, the quality of earnings, mergers and acquisitions, purchased R&amp;D, post-employment benefits, executive compensation, and intangible assets.This course assumes that you have a basic knowledge of accounting, finance, economics, and business strategy. The focus is on integrating key concepts from each of these areas and applying them to financial decision-making. Half of the course time will be devoted to case analysis. Students are responsible for reading each case thoroughly, and familiarizing themselves with the relevant accounting issues, before the class.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 4270 - Intermediate Accounting I: This is the first intermediate course on the theory and practice of accounting and financial reporting.  Designed for both accounting and finance majors, this course combines a study of the theory, rationale, and objectives of corporate financial reporting with an examination of current reporting principles. The aim is to develop a realistic understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of corporate financial reporting, particularly from the viewpoint of the consumer of such financial information. Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 2300 with at least a grade of C.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4280 - Intermediate Accounting II: As the second course in the Intermediate Accounting sequence, this course is designed for both accounting and finance majors. This course combines a study of the theory, rationale, and objectives of corporate financial reporting with an examination of current reporting principles. The aim is to develop a realistic understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of corporate financial reporting, particularly from the viewpoint of the consumer of such financial information. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Completion of MGMT 4270 Intermediate Accounting I with a grade of C or better.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4300 - Emerging Markets: This course heightens students understanding of global business by viewing it through the lens emerging markets. Topics include: the entry of firms from OECD markets into emerging markets; corruption and intellectual property risks in emerging markets; competing in developed markets against firms from emerging markets; unique corporate structures that thrive in emerging markets; and the entrance of emerging market firms into less developed African markets.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 1100.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: MGMT 6300. Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4310 - Financial Trading and Investing: This course introduces interactive trading in financial instruments. Students learn the principles of asset price discovery through real-time trading in a variety of markets, including equities, bonds, options, derivatives. Topics addressed include asset valuation, portfolio management, and risk management in the context of real-time trading of financial instruments. The course uses the facilities of the Lally School’s Virtual Trading Room.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  MGMT 2320 and two upper-level finance courses or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4320 - Investments I: Introduction to financial markets, financial instruments, and basic investment principles. The course provides students with an understanding of how to value securities, how to assess risk and return tradeoffs, how to make investment decisions, and how to measure investment performance. Topics include market microstructure and impact of technology on securities markets, principles of investment banking, valuation of stocks and bonds and hybrid instruments, portfolio theory, asset pricing models, bond portfolio management, and derivative securities.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:MGMT 2100 or ENGR 2600, and MGMT 2300.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Crosslisting: MGMT 6410. Students cannot receive credit for both MGMT 4320 and MGMT 6410.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4330 - Investments II: Advanced course in investment decision making. Analysis of investment strategies in national and international equity markets including emerging markets. Other topics include arbitrage pricing principles, portfolio insurance, study of the term structure of interest rates and interest rate forecasts, duration analysis, and bond portfolio management, including immunization and active strategies. Principles of option and futures pricing and strategies in options and futures markets.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  MGMT 2320 and MGMT 4320.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4340 - Advanced Corporate Finance: Advanced topics in financial theory and corporate policy as they are applied to the modern corporation. Emphasis in blending theory with application. Case studies are used to illustrate relevance of theoretical concepts. Topics include corporate financial decision making under uncertainty, financial forecasting, application of option pricing principles to capital budgeting decision making, mergers and acquisitions, leveraged buyouts and takeovers, leasing, financial engineering.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MGMT 2320 and MGMT 4320 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4360 - International Financial Management: The objective of this course is to provide a conceptual understanding of the international financial markets and instruments and how corporations and investors use them in their financial decision-making process. The course coverage includes the international financial environment, foreign exchange markets, offshore financial markets, derivative securities markets, and international capital markets. Class sessions will be devoted to lectures and case discussions on topics outlined in the class schedule. Equipped with the background provided in the classroom, students solve problems and analyze cases representing real-life situations.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4370 - Risk Management: Overview of risk management, and the concept and measurement of risk; types of risks (market, credit, liquidity, operational, business, strategic).  Concepts, tools, and instruments available for risk management. Specific issues related with managing specific risk types — market, credit, interest-rate, liquidity risk, and operational risk. Securitization, asset-liability management. Concepts underlying insurance and role of insurance for risk management.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 2320 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4380 - Derivatives Markets: This course introduces the institutional structure of the financial markets for derivatives. It also covers hedging and basis risk, interest rate, and stock-index derivatives with financial management applications. Other topics covered include an introduction to options, rational option pricing restrictions, binomial option pricing model, and put and call option strategies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MGMT 2320 and MGMT 4320 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with MGMT 6370.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4390 - International Project ManagementThis course presents the concepts, techniques, and tools for managing global projects. The role of the project manager is examined, together with techniques for controlling cost, schedules and performance parameters. Course deliverables are designed to develop fundamental skills needed by project managers in todays global competitive business environment. Topics include project leadership, project lifecycle methodology, business process development, benchmarking, project planning, execution and control, procurement, communications, organizational change, customer acceptance, performance metrics and project closure. This course is communication intensive.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 1100.
MGMT 4450 - Internet Marketing: Technology is a vital link in how modern corporations identify, acquire, transact with, and keep their customers. This course provides an introduction to both the technology infrastructure most relevant to the customer relationship as well marketing issues that result from the application of computers and communication networks. Topics include issues related to social media, search, online advertising, blogging, customer relationship management, online market segmentation, and marketing of IT products.Prerequisites/Corequisites: <span style="color:rgb(0,0,0);font-family:verdana, sans-serif;font-size:8.5pt;">Prerequisites: MGMT 2430.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed: MGMT 6720. Students cannot receive credit for both MGMT 4450 and MGMT 6720.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4460 - Consumer Behavior and Product Design: This course introduces the motivations and related factors that shape consumers purchasing decisions. Also considered is the consumer perceptual process and how it affects purchasing behavior and consumer reaction to product designs. The relationship between perception and product design is extended to topics such as design for understanding, universal product design, aesthetics, and industrial design.When Offered: Fall 2015Cross Listed: MGMT 6800 - Consumer Behavior/Product Design  Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4470 - Marketing Research: A course on identifying and solving marketing problems through the systematic gathering and analysis of market information. Course focuses on careful definition of marketing problems, specification of information needs, sampling theory, research design, statistical methods, and marketing management implications. A major project involving marketing research for an off-campus client is a key part of the final grade.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: <span style="color:rgb(0,0,0);font-family:verdana, sans-serif;font-size:8.5pt;">MGMT 2430.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed: MGMT 6550. Students cannot receive credit for both MGMT 4470 and MGMT 6550.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4490 - Advertising Strategy and Promotions: Development of branding strategies to accomplish marketing objectives. The development of media plans and schedules to deliver advertising promotions element in the marketing mix.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: <span style="color:rgb(0,0,0);font-family:verdana, sans-serif;font-size:8.5pt;">MGMT 2430.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed: MGMT 6540. Students cannot receive credit for both MGMT 4490 and MGMT 6540.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4510 - Invention, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship: This course focuses on three key goals: providing increased insight into the cognitive foundations of entrepreneurship, offering practice in applying creative thinking to the task of formulating ideas for new products or services, and presenting basic information about the organizational process of commercializing such innovations. These goals will be achieved through a combination of assigned readings, in-class exercises, and individual and team projects. In addition, the course will include contributions from guest speakers who will share with the class their own experiences and expertise.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4520 - Introduction to Technological Entrepreneurship: An introductory course for initiating a new business venture and developing it into a self-sustaining and profitable enterprise. Provides understanding of the process whereby a person decides to become an entrepreneur, screens opportunities, selects an appropriate product/market target, and obtains the necessary resources. Also, provides the theoretical and practical knowledge for the preparation of formal business plans for the development of new products, processes, and services and for the financing of new enterprises.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4530 - Starting Up a New Venture: An understanding of the critical issues related to starting up a new business is gained through team-based experiential learning. Small teams of students develop a comprehensive business plan that can be used to raise money for a new or relatively new venture. The business plans are eligible for submission to the Rensselaer Business Plan Competition. The experiential learning process is enhanced through team meetings with faculty and/or course advisers and through oral presentations to the entire class.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4540 - Venture Capital Finance: This course covers the theory and practice of venture capital financing of entrepreneurial firms. Topics to be discussed include the structure and governance of venture capital funds, venture capital financial contracting, valuation of entrepreneurial firms, staging, syndication, capital structure, and exits (IPOs, acquisitions, secondary sales, buybacks, and liquidations). International differences in venture capital markets will also be studied.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MGMT 2320.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4700 - Corporate Entrepreneurship: In order to survive corporations need to renew themselves. This requires instilling an entrepreneurial mindset which is often a challenge for large established corporations. Corporations caught up in the web of commoditization, stagnation, down-sizing, cost-cutting, re-engineering and the fast pace of globalization and technical change have come to realize that boosting  their entrepreneurial capabilities, can improve their competitive positions through creating new markets and even transforming their industries. Yet overall, these efforts have produced uneven success.  Although entrepreneurs in organizations can benefit from the knowledge resources, experience, and financial assets and networks of the large firm, they are constrained by the firms inertial structure and entrenched management practices, as well as by the influence of current customers. This course helps students understand these challenges and how to  cope with them through developing  appropriate corporate competencies, structures , systems and talent management practices.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4850 - Organizational Behavior in High Performance Organizations: This course provides an overview of basic processes in human behavior that influence the effectiveness of individuals, groups and organizations. Its focus is on understanding what happens during interpersonal interactions in work situations, and what can be done to make employees more effective. Topics covered include organizational socialization, motivation, decision-making, team dynamics, virtual teams, influence, and conflict management. Numerous exercises and case analyses are used in class to help provide students with insights into these processes.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 1100 Introduction to Management.When Offered: Fall and spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4860 - Human Resources in High Performance OrganizationsThis course provides an overview of human resources principles and practices in business organizations. Students are given tools for understanding how people are managed on a day-to-day basis. Topics include: the recruiting and hiring process; self-, peer-, and managerial evaluations; training and development; and legal issues related to the work setting and the job-search process. Students come away with an understanding of the difficulties and challenges associated with workforce management. This course utilizes a combination of lecture, discussion, and experiential exercises.
MGMT 4870 - Strategy and Policy: This is a course that integrates the functional fields of management. The first part of the course focuses on the tools and discipline commonly used in strategy formulation. The second part focuses on the implementation of strategy in a variety of contexts.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MGMT 4860; recommended senior standing.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
MGMT 4900 - Practicum in Management: A problem-solving experience in a business enterprise or public organization in which the student works individually or in a team project. Prior to the start of the internship a list of the learning objectives for this internship will be provided by the student to the faculty mentor. Upon completion of the internship, a written report of the outcomes of the internship and a detailed description of how the learning objectives were met will be provided by the student to the faculty mentor.Graded: Course to be graded on an S/U basis.Credit Hours: 1 to 4, this course can be taken multiple times with a maximum of 8 credit hours applied toward a students degree.
MGMT 4940 - Studies in Management: Credit Hours: 1 to 8
MGMT 6010 - Heroes, Leaders, and Innovators: This course provides an introduction to the “heart and soul” of managerial leadership, teamwork, and innovation by focusing on the behavior and characteristics of those exceptional individuals whose impact extends far beyond their own persona—inside and outside of business. Leaders/innovators are those whose vision, creativity, and charisma allow them to transform their organizations and to change the lives of large numbers of people. Using a combination of case studies and simulations, the course offers a week-long immersion experience into the mindset, actions, and concerns of true business innovators.Credit Hours: 0
MGMT 6020 - Financial Management I: The purpose of this course is to develop a working understanding of the major investment and financial decisions of the firm. Emphasis will be placed upon identifying and solving the problems commonly faced by financial managers. The course presents the needed theory and develops financial problem solving skills through individualized problem solving, structured case analysis, and industry and company analysis using Internet sources.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MGMT 7740.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6030 - Financial Management II: This course, built on Economic and Financial Analysis I, provides a conceptual framework whereby accounting, corporate finance, and investment decisions can be viewed and understood in a unified context of risk and return as it is applicable to all types of businesses and organizations. The course prepares students for future specialized courses in advanced accounting, corporate finance, financial institutions and markets, investment theory, and entrepreneurial finance. The contemporary issues covered in this course include risk and diversification; asset pricing models; capital structure and financing alternatives; dividend and stock repurchases; corporate governance; mergers, acquisitions, and takeovers; financial distress and reorganization; and different international financial topics.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6040 - Talent Management: This course is designed to develop skills in understanding human behavior in organizations and how to effectively manage the talent that resides within employees. Students will learn about essential aspects of managing and developing talent, including individual differences, employee hiring, motivation, team dynamics, leadership, and influencing others. Through a discussion of concepts in human behavior students will learn useful analytical frameworks for understanding the complexities of managing talent in order to best achieve organizational success.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6060 - Business Implications of Emerging Technologies: This course investigates the business dimensions of major technological advances, highlighting how industry structures an organization, the dynamics of competition, patterns of innovation, operational decisions, and financial investment are all influenced by various types of technical breakthrough. Students also get to explore the interplay between emerging technology development and commercialization. The challenges associated with intellectual property protection and utilization, as well as the socio-economic and ethical dimensions of new technology adoption, are explored. Each year, a different set of key technologies will be examined and analyzed.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6070 - Personal Finance: The course takes a comprehensive look at financial planning at the individual level. As such, it provides guidelines and principles for credit management, debt management, investment management, risk management. Taxes, insurance, and retirement strategies also receive prominent attention. Financial planning will be couched in terms of the current state of markets and economies and potential changes in them. The course will be useful across the spectrum of the tactical to the strategic; across that of the short-term to the long-term; that of accumulation of wealth to ultimate disposition of assets and wealth; that of investment to lifestyle; and that of good deals to scams.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Prerequisite: MGMT 4070.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6080 - Networks and Value Creation: This course considers the evolving new models of value creation and business growth being introduced across different industries and examines such critical issues as product and process technology strategy, operational innovation, IT strategies and infrastructures, networks and organization, and finance. Utilizing a series of case studies from across a range of industry networks, students will have a chance to learn how companies can participate in such networks and what unique business resources and capabilities they can employ to enhance their probability of commercial success.When Offered: Fall and spring annually.Cross Listed: MGMT 4080 Networks and Value Creation.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6090 - Enterprise IT Integration: Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6100 - Statistics for Managerial Decision-Making: This course develops an understanding of concepts in business statistics and focuses on application of concepts in problem-solving situations. In particular, students learn to present and describe data, analyze probability distributions, make statistical inferences based on data samples, and develop basic models for prediction and forecasting.
MGMT 6140 - Information Systems for Management: Analyzes the use of information and communications technology to improve performance and to achieve organizational goals. Examines information systems in sales, marketing, finance, and operations. Provides a framework for understanding and evaluating IS contributions to product services and managerial effectiveness. Focuses upon implementation of information technology as a strategic weapon for productivity and competitive advantage. Lectures, case discussion, projects, and technical supplements.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: familiarity with spreadsheet and database software.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6160 - Applied Analytics and Predictive Modeling: Business analytics enables organizations to leverage large volumes of data in order to make more informed decisions. It encompasses a range of approaches to integrating, organizing, and applying data in various settings. This course develops an understanding of concepts in business analytics and data manipulation. In particular, through hands-on experience with a range of techniques students will learn to work with large data sets, analyze trends and segments and develop models for prediction and forecasting. This course is part of the Masters program in Business Analytics and builds on foundations learned in the Fall semester.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 6100 Statistics for Managerial Decision Making or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6170 - Advanced Systems Analysis and Design: This is an advanced course in systems analysis and design that presents conceptual material about both traditional approaches to systems development such as process oriented and data-oriented methodologies and evolving approaches such as object-oriented development methods. Key stages of the systems development life cycle including planning, analysis, and design are the focus of this course. Models and procedures for understanding and modeling an organization’s existing and planned information systems are presented. Computer-aided software engineering tools are used to provide hands-on experience in designing information systems. A case-based approach is used to provide students an opportunity to apply the analytical and design techniques covered in the course. In addition, students are expected to do a real-life systems development project. The course also focuses on the issues and challenges in managing systems development.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MGMT 6140 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6190 - Introduction to Accounting and Financial Management: This course introduces accounting and financial management to first-semester M.S. students. The interpretation and preparation of basic financial statements such as the balance sheet and income statement are introduced along with relevant regulation and practice. In addition, the course introduces the student to basic financial concepts and techniques such as time value, risk, equilibrium asset pricing models, capital budgeting, cost of capital, and capital structure and discusses their applications in practice.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 4040 or undergraduate courses in statistics and calculus.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6210 - Managerial Accounting: This course focuses on the principles of managerial accounting, in three major areas: 1) how managerial behavior influences costs; 2) how managers use accounting information to make strategic decisions; and 3) how to evaluate and control managerial actions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 6190 or 7740.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: MGMT 4250. Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6230 - Global Sourcing and Procurement: Sourcing is an important function that has a significant impact on the profitability of firms. This course examines sourcing from a strategic and operational perspective and presents best practices and frameworks for effective sourcing in large and small firms. Topics covered include factors influencing sourcing strategies of firms and the importance of sourcing in supply chain management, procurement strategies for commodities, differentiated products and services, electronic procurement and cost containment strategies, supplier evaluation and selection, negotiation and contracting, and global sourcing strategies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 6100 Statistics for Managerial Decision Making. Additionally, students should be familiar with basic statistics and have some familiarity with R and Excel.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6240 - Financial Trading and Investing: This course introduces interactive trading in financial instruments. Students learn the principles of asset price discovery through real-time trading in a variety of markets, including equities, bonds, options, derivatives. Topics addressed include asset valuation, portfolio management and risk management in the context of real-time trading of financial instruments. The course uses the facilities of the Lally School’s Virtual Trading Room. Students will work in teams of two in many trading assignments.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  MGMT 6020 and MGMT 6030; or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6260 - Entrepreneurial Finance: The overall objective of this course is to understand how entrepreneurs and investors create value, noting that their interests do not always coincide. This involves learning about topics which trace out the “venture capital cycle”: opportunity recognition; valuation and evaluation; negotiation; structuring financing contract; managing investment; exit strategy. This course is structured into three modules: valuation, private equity market, and harvesting entrepreneurial value.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6270 - Microeconomic Theory for Management: This doctoral-level course introduces microeconomics to first-semester doctoral students in management. Rather than provide formal training for professional research economists, this course seeks to provide a theoretical introduction to microeconomic methods for academics and researchers in business, management, and finance. Topics covered in the course include consumer theory; theory of production, markets, and equilibrium; decision-making under uncertainty; theory of information; agency theory; and game theory.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Enrollment in the doctoral program in management or economics at Rensselaer (or permission from the course instructor), calculus, and matrix mathematics.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6280 - Seminar in Economic Theory: This course covers the tools and concepts used in microeconomic analysis and will study the behavior of the basic building blocks of a market – consumers and firms and different market structures and their welfare properties. These models help with understanding the functioning of a capitalist market system and provide a useful framework to analyze various policy interventions. This course also provides a foundation for studying public finance, game theory, labor economics, etc.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6290 - Macroeconomics and International Environments of Business: This course identifies major forces acting on the enterprise from the macroeconomic and international environment. Key factors include national income and output, interest rates, economic growth and business cycles, international trade and balance of payment, exchange rates, monetary and fiscal policy. Factors are analyzed in terms of their impact on the economic and technological decisions of the enterprise.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6300 - Emerging Markets: This course heightens students understanding of global business by viewing it through the lens emerging markets. Topics include: the entry of firms from OECD markets into emerging markets; corruption and intellectual property risks in emerging markets; competing in developed markets against firms from emerging markets; unique corporate structures that thrive in emerging markets; and the entrance of emerging market firms into less developed African markets.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6310 - Supply Chain Capstone: This course provides students with an opportunity to work on real business supply chain opportunities with companies in a student team over a four to five month period. Students work together as a consulting team with a client and adviser(s) in a business environment to develop solutions that will be put to use by the client to achieve significant business benefits. Student teams develop their analysis and recommendations and complete the project with the delivery of a final report and presentation to the client senior management.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Restricted to students in the M.S. Supply Chain Management program.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6320 - Investment Analysis I: Introduction to investment instruments and modern methods of pricing them. Basic components of viable investment programs are outlined. Topics include expected utility theory and risk aversion, modern portfolio theory, equilibrium in capital markets (CAPM, APT), index models, futures and options, theory of active portfolio management.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 6020. This course is available to Hartford students only.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6340 - Financial Markets and Institutions: Focus on financial markets, new instruments and techniques for financing, risk management and its application to financial institutions. Overview of U.S. financial system, the Federal Reserve system, and monetary policy. Emphasis on impact of technology on securities markets and banks. Discussion of current issues in securities markets and banking, such as securitization, financial derivatives, junk bonds, bank failures, mergers and acquisitions, and international banking.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  MGMT 6020.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6350 - Supply Chain Analytics: This is a hands on course where students learn a mix of theoretical and practical tools and use them to solve a variety of supply chain problems, both analytically and numerically. Time series, Markov chain, optimal control, linear programming, statistical analysis, and other mathematical tools are used to examine data to understand supply, demand and inventory levels and develop insights for managerial recommendations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 6100 Statistics for Managerial Decision-Making and MGMT 6460 Advanced Quantitative Methods.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6360 - International Finance: Course analyzes trends and themes in international financial management, especially how financial management and corporate strategies are carried out in international environments. Topics include foreign exchange markets and risk management, analysis of operating and transaction exposure, international financial markets and banking, international financing and investment. Working capital management and capital budgeting of multinational corporations. Case studies are used.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MGMT 6020 and MGMT 7730.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6370 - Options, Futures, and Derivatives Markets: The purpose of this course is to provide an introduction to second generation financial instruments including forward and futures contracts, options, futures options, and swaps on a variety of underlying instruments including fixed income securities. The fixed income markets will be integrated with the discussion of IRDs (interest rate derivatives).Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6380 - Advanced Corporate Finance: The overall objective of this course is to study advanced corporate finance issues and test empirically the stock market reaction to financing decisions and the issuance of securities. Corporate finance topics include shareholder value and economic value added concepts, as well as corporate governance issues. Financing decisions include venture capital and initial public offerings, seasoned equity offerings, stock splits, corporate bonds and bank loans, stock listings on foreign exchanges. Other topics are mergers and acquisitions, pension fund management, financial analysis, and planning. Real stock prices and case studies are used to apply the theoretical concepts.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MGMT 6020 and MGMT 6030.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6390 - International Operations: This course provides a foundation in the facts and ideas underlying the globalization of production and delivery of goods and services. Topics include: designing global supply chains, managing risks of cross border business relationships, international logistics, establishing world class manufacturing service and R&amp;D in developing countries, integrating superior operating practices and technologies from across the world in diverse national environments, and political and societal issues associated with global operations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 4100 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6400 - Financial Econometrics Modeling: This course addresses financial modeling as an empirical activity. Several key issues and assumptions of finance are addressed through empirical modeling. Topics may include asset pricing, event studies, exchange rate movements, term structure of interest rates, and international linkages among financial markets. Computers are used extensively both in and out of class.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Students should have taken at least two finance courses and MGMT 6100.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6410 - Investments I: The objectives of this course are: 1) to introduce the student to the most important investment instruments currently traded in U.S. financial markets, including forward and futures contracts, options, futures options and swaps on a variety of underlying instruments including fixed income securities; 2) to discuss the major distributions of modern financial economics in pricing them; 3) to discuss their uses by the investment community in practical investment strategies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 6020.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6430 - Financial Statement Analysis: This course is designed to strengthen students ability to correctly analyze, interpret, and evaluate financial statements and their accompanying disclosures. The course is aimed at anyone whose career might involve working with accounting data, and should be especially useful for those interested in consulting and financial analysis. Discussed throughout the semester will be how to use financial accounting information for evaluating past performance and predicting future performance of a company or division. Also discussed will be the key disclosure rules in the United States, the communication methods available to managers, managers incentives and ability to exert discretion over reported earnings, and the interplay between a companys corporate strategy and its financial reporting policies and practices. The course revolves around a number of topics of recent interest to the business community including accounting and financial analysis, performance forecasting, the quality of earnings, mergers and acquisitions, purchased R&amp;D, post-employment benefits, executive compensation, and intangible assets. This course assumes that students have a basic knowledge of accounting, finance, economics, and business strategy. The focus is on integrating key concepts from each of these areas and applying them to financial decision-making. Half of the course time will be devoted to case analysis. Students are responsible for reading each case thoroughly and familiarizing themselves with the relevant accounting issues before the class.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6440 - Financial Simulation: Knowledge of basics of simulation - random variable generation, statistical analysis of simulation output, and variance reduction methods. Basic understanding of stochastic processes, stochastic calculus and statistical estimation. Introduction to financial markets, financial instruments, and financial asset pricing models. Simulation for valuation of securities, estimation of the Greeks and assess risk management strategies. Simulation to assess interest rate dependent claims and credit risk. Simulation to make investment decisions and to measure investment performance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:   MGMT 2320, MGMT 4040.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6460 - Advanced Quantitative Methods for Business: This course is designed to provide the student with an understanding of how quantitative models, methods, algorithms, and computational techniques can be used to solve both services and manufacturing enterprise problems. Students will investigate how to apply optimization methods using a hands-on implementation approach.
MGMT 6470 - Management of Quality, Processes, and Reliability: This course provides in-depth coverage of the quality management field by covering many of the qualitative, management aspects of quality, as well as some of the traditional quantitative measurement and control techniques. The emphasis is on the application of the quality principles to develop an understanding of concepts in quality and apply these concepts in problem solving situations. Six-Sigma methodology is highlighted. Some coverage of international considerations, via ISO-9000, and reliability topics is given. The aim will be to show students how companies have found solutions to problems and improved their processes, products, and services using quality management concepts.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6480 - Service Operations Management: This course discusses the role of services in an economy, managing services for competitive advantage, structuring the service enterprise, managing service operations, service productivity, quality, and growth.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6490 - Competitive Advantage and Operations Strategy: This course includes topics such as manufacturing as a competitive weapon; management of quality; manufacturing technology implementation; strategic impact of advanced manufacturing technologies; and manufacturing’s role in new product development.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6510 - Financial Computation: This course introduces computational techniques for financial analysis, with foci on risk, hedging and portfolio techniques, fixed income instruments, and derivatives analysis. The course covers computational techniques for portfolio optimization, plain vanilla and exotic derivatives valuation and replication, along with interest rate and fixed income instruments. This course will introduce numerical analysis, interpolation, Monte Carlo and finite difference methods, lattices, linear and dynamic programming, optimization and MATLAB, all in a financial computational context.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 4040 or undergraduate courses in statistics and calculus.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6520 - Financial Modeling: This course introduces quantitative analysis for financial markets and instruments. The course covers applications of linear math to hedging and valuation, applications of calculus to valuation and risk analysis, introduces differential equations and their applications to hedging and valuation and introduces stochastic processes in a financial markets context. Course coverage will also extend to portfolio analysis and standard equilibrium asset pricing models.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 4040 or undergraduate courses in statistics and calculus.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6530 - Making Business Happen: Analyze the process of identifying prospective markets and customers, developing channels, defining the value proposition, selling products and services, and managing a sales force. Learn about tools ranging from customized consultative sales to commodity brokering, customer relationship management systems to trade press articles. Develop the skills to effectively listen, recognize opportunity, verbally persuade, handle objections, and prospect. Develop an understanding of customer needs, approach strategies, and effective presentations.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6540 - Marketing Communication and Branding Strategies: Advanced study of the promotion management process including market situation analysis, media selection, spending plans, copy strategy, and advertising research methods. The focus is on integrating promotion strategies with buyer needs in terms of unifying brand strategies. Other brand elements include product conceptualization, distribution strategies, and new communication technologies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6550 - Marketing Research: Marketing strategy decisions are developed in the framework of many case studies. Marketing research techniques, including questionnaire development and data analysis, are introduced and utilized in a team project.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MGMT 6100 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6560 - Technology Fundamentals for Business Analytics: The widespread proliferation of IT-influenced economic activity leaves behind a rich trail of micro-level data, enabling organizations to use analytics and experimentation in both strategy and operations. This course provides a hands-on introduction to the concepts, methods and processes of business analytics. Students will learn how to obtain data and draw business inferences from data by asking the right questions and using the appropriate tools.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6570 - Advanced Data Resource Management: The primary objective of this course is to introduce the multifaceted role of data as a resource of the organization, in three ways. First, it examines the role of data at the operational, tactical, and strategic levels of the organization. Second, it provides students with knowledge and hands on training of technologies that manipulate data, including structured query language (SQL), extraction transformation and loading tools (ETL), data warehousing (DW), online analytical processing (OLAP), and data mining (DM). The course exposes students to big data management techniques. Finally, the course provides students the theory and hands on training to understand the transformation of data to information.<br />
MGMT 6580 - Marketing High-Tech Products: This course deals with the peculiarities of marketing products and services in high-tech environments. High-tech environments are characterized by high dynamism, high uncertainty, and compressed time cycles. The course consists of case studies, computer simulations, and a team project.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6590 - Commercializing Advanced Technologies: This 3-credit course views potential breakthrough innovation from the perspective of the project manager, either in the firm or as a start up organization. The course offers methods and frameworks for commercializing nascent technologies that offer potentially breakthrough value to the market and, therefore, enormous reward for the firm. Additionally, legal and ethical consequences are considered.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6600 - Research and Development Management: The course deals with the responsibilities of and operating problems faced by managers of research and development. The following areas are included: technology forecasting, technology planning, selection and evaluation of R&amp;D projects, resource allocation, planning, control, and measuring results of R&amp;D. Particular attention is given to creative problem solving, motivating and managing creative individuals, barriers to innovation, and organization alternatives for R&amp;D, including matrix and project organizations.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6610 - Global Strategic Management of Technological Innovation: The course helps develop an understanding of and the method for managing technology as a strategic resource of the firm. In doing so, an understanding of the process, roles, and rewards of technological innovation are developed. Integrating the strategic relationship of technology with strategic planning, marketing, finance, engineering, and manufacturing are covered. Governmental, societal, and international issues are briefly covered. The course uses a variety of cases, readings, reports, and lectures.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6620 - Principles of Technological Entrepreneurship: An introductory graduate course in initiating new technology-based business ventures and developing them into self-sustaining and profitable enterprises. Examines the process whereby a person decides to become an entrepreneur, screens opportunities, selects an appropriate product/market target, and obtains the necessary resources. Provides the theoretical and practical knowledge for the preparation of formal business plans. Students enrolled in the full-time MBA program cannot use this course on the Plan of Study. This course is intended for students enrolled in the part-time MBA, M.S. in Management or those seeking degrees in other schools at Rensselaer.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6630 - Starting Up A New Venture: An understanding of the critical issues related to starting up a new business is gained through team-based experiential learning. Small teams of students develop a comprehensive business plan that can be used to raise money for a new or relatively new venture. The experiential learning process is enhanced through team meetings with faculty and/or course advisers and through oral presentations to the entire class.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MGMT 6620.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6640 - Invention, Innovation, and Entrepreneurship: Creativity is the starting point for technological entrepreneurship. Through interaction with faculty and guest speakers, students increase their understanding of the creative process and some of the tools that can be implemented to stimulate and/or manage individual and collective creativity. In addition, through application of these techniques in course activities, students explore and attempt to enhance their own creativity.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6650 - Technology and Competitive Advantage: A capstone sequence in policy and strategy aimed at developing students understanding of the relationship between business strategy and technology. The process of converting technological opportunity into competitive advantage is viewed from the perspective of both large, established companies and new ventures.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: course is taken towards the end of the program.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6660 - Strategy, Technology, and Entrepreneurship: This is part two of the two-course sequence that begins with MGMT 6650. This course is about strategy implementation and fundamental concepts in implementing strategy both at the corporate level and the business unit level.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 6650 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6670 - Practicum in Technological Entrepreneurship: Provides students with opportunities to learn by text, discussion, and practical fieldwork, how successful new technological ventures are created, developed, and financed. Students work alone or in small teams with guidance from experienced entrepreneurs. Students wishing to take this course are required do so in their first year of study.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6680 - Strategy, Technology, and Global Competitive Advantage: This course emphasizes the linkage between technology, strategy, and achieving global competitive advantage. This course develops the concept and practical tools of strategy, strategic planning, and implementation both at the business unit and at corporate levels. The strategies of technology intensive international companies such as Intel, Microsoft, Netscape, Apple, Rhone-Poulenc, Toshiba, Xerox, MCI, ABB, and MapInfo are investigated and compared. The study of the evolution of General Electric’s strategies from 1970 to 2000 completes the course. Students work in teams to develop a five-year strategic plan for a company or business unit of their choice, with a minimum of three strategic alternatives, and recommend the chosen alternative.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3



MGMT 6690 - Negotiations: This course is designed to help develop essential expertise in managing negotiations that occur in a broad array of settings. Students will learn to recognize types of negotiation, and gain proficiency in helping to shape beneficial outcomes. Students will develop negotiation skills experientially using a variety of exercises and case studies while implementing useful analytical frameworks.When Offered: Fall or spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6700 - Corporate Entrepreneurship: Organizations that increase their capacity for entrepreneurship build a foundation for long term competitiveness. This course examines how organizations can build management systems to enable entrepreneurial activities while simultaneously addressing current operational concerns. This tension differentiates the corporate entrepreneurial challenge from the start-up venture. The course focuses on both the organizational and project levels, studying how organizations can build an entrepreneurial capacity, and how project champions can ensure their projects are effectively evaluated, supported, and managed.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6720 - Internet Marketing: Technology is a vital link in how modern corporations identify, acquire, transact with, and keep their customers. This course provides an introduction to both the technology infrastructure most relevant to the customer relationship as well as marketing issues that result from the application of computers and communication networks. Topics include issues related to social media, search, online advertising, blogging, customer relationship management, online market segmentation, and marketing of IT products.<br />
MGMT 6730 - Technological Change and International Competitiveness: Analysis of the differences among technical systems and interactions with industrial growth is undertaken with regard to nation states, industrial sectors, and companies. To develop tools of analysis regarding technological change, industrial policy, and corporate performance. The impact of technological change on industrial growth and competitiveness is viewed from three perspectives: the general manager, the technical professional, and the public official.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6750 - Legal Aspects of E-Business and Information Technology: Legal, regulatory, and public policy issues related to e-commerce/e-business, the Internet, and information technology are explored through an analytic, critical thinking approach. Topics include: e-contracts, digital signatures, B2B and B2C agreements; ownership, protection, and exploitation of intellectual capital including patents, trademarks, copyrights and trade secrets; regulatory issues; ISP and Web site liability including defamation; copyright infringement, securities regulation, and criminal acts; policy issues including privacy, security and encryption, and obscene materials. Global e-commerce will be explored.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6760 - Advanced Analytics: Business analytics enables organizations to leverage large volumes of data in order to make more informed decisions. It encompasses a range of approaches to integrating, organizing, and applying data in various settings. This course develops an understanding of concepts in business analytics and data manipulation. In particular, through hands-on experience with a range of techniques students will learn to work with large data sets, analyze trends and segments and develop models for prediction and forecasting. This course is part of the Masters program in Business Analytics and builds on foundations learned in the fall semester  Predictive analytics refers to a host of approaches aimed at using historical data for future predictions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 6100 Statistics for Managerial Decision Making or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6790 - Business Analytics Capstone: This course provides students with an opportunity to work on real business analytics problems with a company. Students work in small consultant teams with a client and adviser(s) to develop solutions that will be put to use by the client to achieve significant business benefits. Student teams develop their analysis and recommendations and complete the project with the delivery of a final report and presentation to the client senior management.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 6100 (Statistics for Managerial Decision Making) and MGMT 6560 (Technology Fundamentals for Business Analytics).When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6800 - Consumer Behavior and Product Design: This course introduces the motivations and related factors that shape consumers purchasing decisions. Also considered is the consumer perceptual process and how it affects purchasing behavior and consumer reaction to product designs. The relationship between perception and product design is extended to topics such as design for understanding, universal product design, aesthetics, and industrial design.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: MGMT 4460 Consumer Behavior and Product Design.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6810 - Management of Technical Projects: The purpose of this course is to enable the technically oriented manager to select projects of value to the organization, develop a project plan including staffing, perform a risk analysis on the project, and successfully execute the project. Students, working alone or in teams, practice the project management process by planning a current project in the area of new product development, process reengineering, information systems, or any other project with business implementation.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 6840 - Practicum in Management: This practicum provides students with the opportunities to put their knowledge to work in a field project in their area of concentration, including entrepreneurship, finance, marketing, information systems, production and operations management, environmental management policy. Projects are conducted in collaboration with companies in the Rensselaer Incubator Center, the Technology Park, and the Capital Region. Project teams make presentations before a panel.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: all first year MBA courses and faculty adviser approval.Credit Hours: 3 to 6
MGMT 6940 - Independent Study: Credit Hours: 1 to 6
MGMT 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Master’s program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A,B,C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
MGMT 7030 - Strategy, Technology, and Competition I: This course covers the fundamentals of business and corporate strategy, integrating these concepts into an environment of technological change, competition, and entrepreneurship. The course includes the following areas of emphasis: concepts of strategy, industry environment, resources and capabilities of the firm, organization and systems of the firm, the dynamics of competitive advantage, strategic alternative analysis, and strategies in different contexts. The course uses business cases and a project to enrich the theoretical concepts.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7050 - Design, Manufacturing, and Marketing I: This course immerses students in the practices and activities that lead to the creation of innovative new products and services. Through a team-based learning experience, students generate an idea for a new product or service and follow the development process from conception through planning for commercialization. Through lectures, cases, and practical exercises, students learn how to overcome hurdles inherent in new product and service development. Students apply this knowledge in all phases of product development, including concept testing, product design, production planning, and market strategy. The project undertaken in this course provides student teams with an opportunity to create a new venture that may then be carried forward utilizing Rensselaers technological resources such as the Incubator Program and Rensselaers Technology Park.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7060 - Design, Manufacturing, and Marketing II: This course immerses students in the practices and activities that lead to the creation of innovative new products and services. Through a team-based learning experience, students generate an idea for a new product or service and follow the development process from conception through planning for commercialization. Through lectures, cases, and practical exercises, students learn how to overcome hurdles inherent in new product and service development. Students apply this knowledge in all phases of product development, including concept testing, product design, production planning, and market strategy. The project undertaken in this course provides student teams with an opportunity to create a new venture that may then be carried forward utilizing Rensselaers technological resources such as the Incubator Program and Rensselaers Technology Park.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7070 - Managing on the Edge: Corporate Innovation for the Coming Years: This course investigates the challenges of managing and leading organizations in situations characterized by their non-linear, unpredictable nature. Students will be challenged to develop innovative responses and solutions, drawing upon the full array of knowledge, skills, and insights they have gained from their two years of MBA study. Along with learning to deal with risk and uncertainty, the soon-to-be MBA graduates will be prepared for addressing the increasing degrees of fluidity and turbulence found in todays business, economic, and competitive environments.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7230 - Professional Development Workshop I: This course is the first in a three part series of Professional Development Workshops that teach practical skills in laboratory settings. Over the first three semesters, the MBA cohort student will be exposed to professional skills training, distinguished speakers, and leadership development. This first part will concentrate on building writing and presentation skills, and practicing those skills in the conceptual environment of Leadership, Followership, and Membership.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MBA Cohort.When Offered: Fall term of the first year of the MBA cohort, every other week, for six weeks.Credit Hours: 0
MGMT 7240 - Professional Development Workshop II: This course is the second in a three part series of Professional Development Workshops that teach practical skills in laboratory settings, in the context of Leadership, Followership, and Membership. Over the first three semesters, the MBA cohort student will be exposed to professional skills training, distinguished speakers, and critical leadership development. This second workshop will concentrate on building leadership skills through exercises, corporate site visits, and audiences with distinguished speakers.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MBA Cohort.When Offered: Spring term of the first year of the MBA cohort, every other week, for six weeks.Credit Hours: 0
MGMT 7250 - Professional Development Workshop III: This course is the last in a three part series of Professional Development Workshops that teach practical skills in laboratory settings, in the context of Leadership, Followership, and Membership. Over the first three semesters, the MBA cohort student will be exposed to professional skills training, distinguished speakers, and critical leadership development. This third workshop will concentrate on building leadership skills through exercises, personal and professional awareness, and group interactions and exercises.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  MBA cohort.When Offered: Fall term of the second year of the MBA cohort for five days prior to semester start. Credit Hours: 0
MGMT 7430 - Investments II: Many of the tried and true  investment strategies have failed of late to protect the wealth and capital of individuals and organizations. This course provides substantial background into how investment decisions are made in personal, business, and government settings, under the requirement that risk management and wealth preservation are governing factors.  Short and long term investment strategies and instruments are examined, focusing on retirement and workplace benefits. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 6410.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: MGMT 4330. Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7730 - Economics and Institutions: Main course objective is to introduce students to basic economics principles and establish economics as a managerial decision-making framework. The course will draw on economic analysis of such concepts as cost, demand, profit, competition, pricing strategy, and market protection and tie them to operational business decisions.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7740 - Accounting for Reporting and Control: This course introduces theories and practices of financial as well as managerial accounting. The financial accounting sessions provide an overview of external financial statements. The managerial accounting sessions focus on how accounting information is used in the internal managerial decision making process within a firm as well as cover cost accounting, budgeting, and performance evaluation tools.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7750 - Global Business and Social Responsibility: The course examines different responses of American, European, and Asian firms to a global economy, within an historic and evolving context. Models of economic, social, political, technological, and national development will be introduced. Various conflicting demands of national governments, interest groups, corporations, unions, NGOs and consumers are often expressed in terms of corporate, ethical, and social responsibility. Cases will be analyzed in terms of models of global business practices and conflicting claims will be critically evaluated.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7760 - Risk Management: Overview of risk management and the concept and measurement of risk; types of risks (market, credit, liquidity, operational, business, strategic). Concepts, tools, and instruments available for risk management. Specific issues related with managing specific risk types— market, credit, interest-rates, liquidity, risk and operational risk. Securitization, asset-liability management. Concepts underlying insurance and role of insurance for risk management.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MGMT 6020 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7770 - Professional Development Workshop I-MS: The PDW sequence is designed to develop the professional skills of students in the MS Programs that are needed to be a successful contributor in a business setting. PDW I follows a framework of Leadership, Followership, and Membership in a professional community. Students will gain practical experience through exposure to experts in specific skill areas, role play and practice sessions, and exercise completions. The fall semester concentrates on individual skills development in presentation, communication and networking. Additionally, membership in ones professional community will be emphasized through engagement in two activities specific to the students MS Program. Building on the skills and abilities obtained earlier in your career, this PDW is geared toward a higher level of professionalism inherent in a successful business environment.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 0
MGMT 7780 - Professional Development Workshop II-MS: The PDW sequence is designed to develop the professional skills of students in the MS Programs that are needed to be a successful contributor in a business setting. The PDW II will continue to follow a framework of Leadership, Followership and Membership in a professional community. Students will gain practical experience through exposure to experts in specific skill areas, role play and practice sessions, and exercise completions. The second semester emphasizes developing influence skills, understanding and shaping group dynamics, and navigating organizational politics. Additionally, membership in ones professional community will be emphasized through engagement in four hours of activities specific to the students M.S. program.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 0
MGMT 7800 - Doctoral Research Methods I: The objectives of this beginning doctoral course are to introduce students to social science theory development, expose students to a broad array of research techniques, and help students design research programs and write about them. The underpinnings of scientific theory are reviewed along with a range of quantitative and qualitative research methods. Drawing on their own interests, students write one research proposal and two research papers illustrating the application of two different research methodologies.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7810 - Doctoral Research Methods II: This course develops empirical tools and their applications to key areas of business analysis, including finance, human resource analysis, marketing, organizational behavior, and production appropriate theories. Empirical techniques emphasized include advanced regression and structural equations methods. Specialized statistical tools will be used.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 7800 Doctoral Research Methods I.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7820 - Foundations of Management Thought: Theoretical and Empirical Foundations of Business Research: This seminar introduces Ph.D. students to the world of research in the scholarly domains associated with Business. Philosophy of research, theory and empirical foundations used in the research process are discussed. Students are exposed to classic scholarly papers that have influenced the field across multiple business disciplines, as well as research programs of various Lally faculty. The course also introduces students to the norms of behavior and expectations of an academic career.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7830 - Doctoral Level Data Analysis: The objective of this class is to develop skills necessary to understand and assess applications that use panel data techniques. Standard linear regression models are used as a benchmark. Basic knowledge of time series analysis is introduced, followed by panel data settings involving fixed and random effects. Recently developed GMM and instrumental variables methods are introduced and nonlinear panel data with binary outcomes is covered. Students will work through practical examples usingStataand Matlab.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 7810 Doctoral Methods II or permission.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7840 - Empirical Issues in Management Research: The course focuses on the empirical issues of academic research in different business disciplines. It broadly encompasses a number of key research topics emphasizing the theoretical underpinnings and the empirical frontiers. The course will concentrate on the use of statistical approaches relevant for engaging in empirical research. Overall, the course attempts to develop skills such as synthesizing research, developing research designs, building theories, and using appropriate empirical methodology and techniques.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7850 - Management Research Workshop: The course focuses primarily on empirical issues in academic research. Students will learn to use theoretical and empirical skills acquired in previous courses and seminars in developing research in general, and academic papers in particular, in their respective fields.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MGMT 7840 Empirical Issues in Management Research.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7860 - Organizational Behavior Theory and Research Seminar: This course is designed to introduce students to theories and principles in organizational behavior research. Students will investigate important theoretical perspectives, concepts, and research methods in behavioral research, with an emphasis on developing an understanding of how research in the field is conducted and how further contributions to this field might be made. Through in-depth discussions of selected research articles, students will gain some proficiency in framing meaningful research questions and deriving testable hypotheses.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Good standing as a Ph.D. student.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7870 - Strategic Management Theory Seminar: This is a reading course designed to introduce first-year Ph.D. students in management to the theory families and empirical research in the field of Strategic Management. Strategic Management theories draw from parent disciplines of economics, psychology, sociology, anthropology, evolutionary biology, and political science. This puts the field at the nexus of all management studies.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: doctoral student standing, Doctoral Research Methods sequence, or permission of doctoral program director.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7880 - Financial Theory: This is an introductory course of theoretical research in corporate finance. The course will examine the fundamentals of corporate finance theory (e.g., capital structure choice, dividend policy, etc.), as well as various tool areas (e. g, moral hazard and agency problems, and adverse selection and signaling). Knowledge of corporate finance at the MBA level, or its equivalent, is required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: doctoral student standing or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 7890 - Research Seminar in Management Information Systems: This doctoral seminar examines the major streams of theory and research in information management and information systems. The course will explore the major issues, theories, and research methods in information systems, research through classic readings, information management, and reference disciplines. Key areas in information systems research will be covered, such as strategic and economic perspectives of information management, adoption and diffusion theory, information technology and organizational design, and how research methods are employed in information systems research. Students will gain an understanding of what theory is and how to develop and evaluate theory in the area of information management and information systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: doctoral student standing or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MGMT 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
MTLE 1200 - Introduction to Materials Engineering: A 1-credit course comprising class lectures, laboratory visits, and group projects.The course will provide an overview of the field of materials science and engineering, highlighting how understanding the structures, properties and processing of materials provides scientific and engineering advances that sustain the progress of technology. When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
MTLE 2020 - Introduction to Ceramic Materials: Structure and properties of crystalline ceramic materials. Atomic bonding, crystal structure, structural imperfections, nonstoichiometry, surfaces, and interfaces. Reactions in ceramic systems in terms of phase equilibria, nucleation and crystal growth, diffusion, grain growth, and sintering. Ceramic microstructures and various properties.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 2100 - Structure of Engineering Materials: The first course in Materials Science and Engineering. Structures of metals, ceramics, and polymers and experimental techniques for their determination are discussed. Laboratory experience is included.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  ENGR 1600 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MTLE 2940 - Readings in Materials: Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 2980 - Senior Project: Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4030 - Glass Science: Glasses are used in optical communications (optical fibers), electronics (insulator), and nuclear waste processing in addition to conventional use as windows, light bulbs, and containers. Subjects covered include: Formation and structure of inorganic glasses. The relationship between properties and cooling rate. Viscosity and structural relaxation. Phase separation and crystallization. Ionic diffusion and electrical properties. Mechanical strength and fatigue. Glass surface and chemical durability. Optical properties.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4050 - Introduction to Polymers: Introduction to Polymers is a first course on polymer science and structure-property relationships.<br />
MTLE 4100 - Thermodynamics of Materials: Rigorous development of classical thermodynamics as applied to prediction of materials properties. Nonideal gases, solutions, phase equilibria, chemical equilibria, defects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2250, CHEM 1100, ENGR 1600 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MTLE 4150 - Kinetics in Materials Systems: Kinetic processes in materials. Overview of kinetics in relation to equilibrium thermodynamics, atomistics and mathematics of diffusion, phase transformations, and microstructural evolution. All materials classes, including metals and alloys, ionic and intermetallic compounds, glasses, semiconductors, and polymers will be considered in terms of similarities and differences. Includes laboratory component.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MTLE 4100, CHEM 1100, ENGR 1600.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MTLE 4160 - Semiconducting Materials: Review of electronic properties of materials. Growth and structure of semiconductors. Diffusion, ion implantation, oxidation, microlithography, plasma etching, thin film deposition, metallization, with emphasis on Si technology. Introduction to compound semiconductors.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MTLE 4200 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4200 - Electrical and Optical Properties of Materials: Electronic and optical properties of metals, dielectrics, semiconductors, and organic molecular solids. Introduction to quantum mechanics. Lattice vibrations, magnetism, energy bands in solids. Free and nearly free electron models. Effect of electronic structure on interatomic bonding. Semiconductors and their devices.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 1600, MTLE 2100, PHYS 1200.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MTLE 4250 - Mechanical Properties of Materials: This is a required departmental course, but is also appropriate for biomedical engineers and other engineering disciplines as an elective. This course teaches the mechanical properties of metals, ceramics, and polymers from both the macroscopic and atomistic or micromechanical viewpoints. An introduction to three-dimensional stresses and strains. Elastic behavior, plastic behavior, strengthening mechanisms, fracture, creep, and fatigue are all addressed. Includes laboratory component.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 1600, MTLE 2100.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MTLE 4310 - Corrosion: Mechanisms, characteristics, and types of corrosion. Methods for testing, combating, and evaluating corrosion resistance. Suitability of metals, ceramics, and organic materials in corrosive environments. Oxidation and other high-temperature gas-metal reactions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite:  MTLE 4910.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4400 - Materials Synthesis and Processing: This course covers materials processing in the area of metals, polymers, ceramics, and electronic materials. Some processes covered include casting, molding, deformation processing, additive processing, and joining methods. Design and analysis of experiments and process modeling are emphasized. Includes laboratories.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: MTLE 4200, MTLE 4150, MTLE 4250.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MTLE 4430 - Fundamentals of Metallurgical Alloy Systems: This course explores principles of chemical and physical metallurgy of the common alloy systems, including mild and low alloy steels, copper, aluminum, and aluminum alloys. Applications include alloys designed for corrosion resistance and elevated temperature applications. Alloy design and development for extreme or exotic environments also will be discussed. In each case alloy development concepts will be related to the appropriate engineering applications. When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4440 - Thin FilmsIntroduction into thin film deposition technologies that are essential in industry. Practical technical aspects and fundamental growth processes are discussed. The course covers: evaporation techniques, sputter deposition, plasma and ion-beam processing, chemical vapor deposition, molecular beam epitaxy, surface science, nucleation and growth, epitaxy, texture evolution, nanostructure formation, stress.
MTLE 4460 - Materials for Energy Applications: This course covers all aspects of the role materials play in energy. The course takes a fundamental perspective and these materials can range from neutrons to photons to energetic biomolecules. The five forms of energy (thermal, electromagnetic, mechanical, chemical, and nuclear) are stressed in every lecture as are the appropriate thermodynamic laws and governing cycles. When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4500 - Computational Methods for Materials Design: This course will provide the background and a set of examples of how computational methods can be applied to design of materials with desired structure and properties. The methods will span multi-length and time scales, including first-principles approaches, molecular dynamics simulations, stochastic methods for optimization and sampling, and computational thermodynamics. Lectures will be complemented by computer labs with hands-on exercises using publicly available or commercial software packages.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Undergraduates must have junior standing or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4520 - Materials under Extreme ConditionsThis course will review basic thermodynamic and kinetic concepts, which underpin how material behaves under extreme thermal, mechanical, chemical, electrical, and magnetic conditions as well as high-energy irradiations. Engineering materials that can withstand harsh environments and new materials with unique crystal structures and microstructures will be surveyed.
MTLE 4720 - Applied Mathematical Methods in Materials: Students apply mathematical and numerical techniques to understand materials engineering topics such as materials structure, symmetry, diffusion, mechanics, and physics of solids. Class uses examples from materials science and engineering core courses to introduce mathematical concepts and materials-related problem solving skills. Topics include linear algebra, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, quadratic forms, tensor operations, symmetry operations, calculus of several variables, ordinary and partial differential equations, Fourier analysis, integral transformations, numerical methods, and calculus of variations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: MATH 2400, and access to Mathematica.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: BMED 4720.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4910 - Materials Selection: This class covers basic materials selection concepts and the underlying structure-property-process-performance interaction. Engineering materials, structures and properties, principles and process of materials selection, generation of materials performances indices, assessment and optimization of performance, processing routes and manufacturing issues, role of reverse engineering and failure analysis in design are covered. Materials selection against yielding, fracture, flexure, buckling, fatigue, creep, corrosion, and wear are addressed. Decomposition of engineering problems into functional, geometric, and materials constraints are emphasized. Materials selection based on simple and complex or conflicting constraints will be developed. Students will perform written assignments and oral presentations to develop communication skills. Enrollment for MS&amp;E majors is restricted to juniors, seniors, or graduates.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CHEM 1100 and ENGR 1600.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4920 - Multidisciplinary Capstone Design: Acapstone design experience that engages students from biomedical, computer systems, electrical, industrial, materials, and mechanical engineering on teams in an open-ended engineering design problem in preparation for professional practice. With the guidance of a multidisciplinary team of faculty members and instructional support staff, students apply knowledge and skills from prior coursework. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 2050, MTLE 4910 and senior status.When Offered: Spring and fall terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 4900, ISYE 4270, and MANE 4260. Students cannot obtain credit for this course and ECSE 4900, ISYE 4270, MANE 4260.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 4960 - Topics in Materials Engineering: Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6010 - Defects in Solids: Point defects, nonstoichiometry, diffusion and defects, electronic defects, elastic properties of dislocations, dislocation-point defect interactions, dislocation arrays, grain boundaries, stacking faults, phase stability, twin boundaries, epitaxial interfaces.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MTLE 2100 or equivalent. When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6030 - Advanced Thermodynamics: Review of classical thermodynamics. Development of basic concepts of statistical thermodynamics. Application of both classical and statistical techniques to the determination of phase and chemical equilibrium in real systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MTLE 4100 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MTLE 6040 - Principles of Crystallography and X-Ray Diffraction: Symmetry operations, point groups and space groups, x-ray and electron diffraction techniques, reciprocal lattice, Ewald sphere, mathematics of diffraction, crystal chemistry, crystal structure-property relationships.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6050 - Introduction to Polymers: Introduction to Polymers is a first course on polymer science and structure-property relationships. Topics include chemical and molecular structure; morphology (structure) of amorphous and crystalline polymers; crystallization phenomena; polymer solutions and blends; physical properties of polymers in relation to structure, including rubber elasticity, viscoelasticity, and glass transition; and mechanical and rheological properties and testing.Prerequisites/Corequisites: There are no prerequisites for this course. This is a companion course to CHEM 4620 Introduction to Polymer Chemistry.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: MTLE 4050.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6060 - Advanced Kinetics of Materials Reactions: Diffusion and phase transformations: solutions to the diffusion equation, moving boundaries, concentration-dependent diffusion coefficient, interdiffusion, nucleation, crystal growth from the vapor and solution, solidification. Precipitation: general, cellular, and G-P zones. Allotropic and martensitic transformations. Grain growth. Sintering.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MTLE 4100 or MTLE 6030 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6080 - Electron Microscopy of Materials: Introduction to electron optics, electron diffraction contrast mechanisms, specimen preparation, and microanalysis. Theory and operating fundamentals of the SEM, TEM, STEM, and the electron microprobe. Analysis of images from crystalline materials using kinematical and dynamical theories of electron diffraction. Includes laboratory component.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: MTLE 2100 or MTLE 6040.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6110 - Diffusion in Solids: The diffusion process in metals and alloys. Solution to Ficks law. Self-diffusion. Effect of temperature upon diffusion. Grain boundary and surface diffusion. Solution and diffusion of gases in metals. Diffusion in carburizing, the austenite transformation, powder metallurgy, and the scaling of metals and alloys.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6120 - Advanced Electronic Properties of Materials: Review of essential quantum mechanics, including exact models and approximate methods.Application to behavior of electrons in solids. Electronic energy bands in metals, semiconductors, and insulators. Charge carrier statistics and transport.Maxwells equations. Dielectric, optical, and magnetic properties.Applications to semiconductor, optoelectronic, and magnetic devices.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6150 - Fracture of Solids: Review of elasticity and plasticity theory. Calculation of theoretical cohesive strength of crystalline solids; influence of stress concentrations on fracture strength. Fractography. Theory and applications of linear elastic fracture mechanics. Fracture testing. Elastic-plastic fracture mechanics. Dislocation theories of cleavage fracture. Phenomenology and theories of stress corrosion cracking, creep rupture, fatigue.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6220 - Advanced Semiconducting Materials and Processing: Discussion of selected advanced and emerging topics in microelectronics materials and fabrication. These may include metallization, thin film deposition, interconnection technology, microlithography, plasma etching and processing.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6250 - Advanced Mechanical Properties of Materials: The phenomenological, mechanistic, and micro-structural aspects of the mechanical properties of materials are developed, with particular emphasis on the similarities and differences among various material systems including metals, ceramics, and polymers. Phenomenological aspects of the three-dimensional characteristics of stress and strain, various yield criteria, elastic behavior, viscoelastic behavior, plastic behavior, statistical aspects of brittle fracture and fracture mechanics are presented. Mechanistic and micro-structural topics include edge and screw dislocation behavior, slip systems, critical resolved shear stress, dislocation multiplication and interactions, barriers to motion, polymer chain conformation and entropy.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MTLE 6300 - Integrated Circuit Fabrication Laboratory: Theory and practice of IC fabrication in a research laboratory environment. Test chips are fabricated and the resulting devices and circuits evaluated. Processes and fabrication equipment studied and used include oxidation/diffusion, CVD reactors, photolithography, plasma etching, vacuum evaporator, ion implantation, etc. Instruments used in process monitoring and final testing include thin film profilometer, ellipsometer, resistivity probe, scanning electron microscope, capacitance-voltage system, etc. The fundamentals of hazardous material handling and clean room procedures are studied.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  ECSE 4250 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 6300. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ECSE 6300.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6400 - Vacuum Techniques: Principles and practice of producing, measuring, and using pressures from atmospheric down to 10-15 atmospheres. Gas kinetics and flow of gases at low pressures. Basic vacuum system calculations. System design and leak detection. Physical and chemisorption of gases. Generation of clean surfaces and study of reactions on them.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6420 - Surface Phenomena: The thermodynamics and reactivity of surfaces. Classical thermodynamics of surfaces. Atomistic models of the crystal surfaces. Electron diffraction from surface layers. Surface diffusion. Physical and chemisorption of gases, chemical reactions at surfaces. Nucleation of surface and bulk phases.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6430 - Materials Characterization: Principles and applications of current techniques for the chemical, structural, and morphological characterization of engineering materials, with an emphasis on materials used in the microelectronics industry. Techniques studied include various electron and ion spectroscopies, electron microscopies, and diffraction techniques.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6440 - Thin Films: Introduction into thin film deposition technologies that are essential in industry. Practical technical aspects and fundamental growth processes are discussed. The course covers: evaporation techniques, sputter deposition, plasma and ion-beam processing, chemical vapor deposition, molecular beam epitaxy, surface science, nucleation and growth, epitaxy, texture evolution, nanostructure formation, stress.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Meets with MTLE 4440.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6450 - Melting and Solidification: Thermodynamics, kinetics, and morphologies of solid-liquid interfaces. Heat flow phenomena in casting and crystal growth. Structure of molten systems. Physical chemistry of vacuum processing. Mechanics of solidification of metals under equilibrium and nonequilibrium conditions. Nucleation and growth phenomena. Solute redistribution during freezing. Metal transport during freezing. Grain size control. Application of theory to production of engineering alloys.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6460 - Advanced Structure and Bonding in Materials: Phenomenological and quantitative descriptions of crystal symmetry and structure. Theories of primary and secondary bonding in crystals. Theory and application of diffraction techniques for structure determination. Models of cohesive forces in solids. Emphasis is placed on the intimate connection between crystal structure, bonding, electronic structure, and properties of solids.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
MTLE 6470 - Processing of Biomaterials: <p style="margin-left:0in;text-align:left;">Processing of biomaterials gives an overview of the most advanced techniques to process biomaterials into structures that satisfy next generation applications. All materials classes will be covered including polymers, ceramics, metals, composites and cells and tissues. In each case, the material-specific processing and the properties and potential applications will be covered.Prerequisites/Corequisites: ENGR 1600.
MTLE 6480 - Nanostructured Materials: The course introduces students to the building blocks of nanostructured materials, material behavior when they are assembled, and the technological implications of these materials, with emphasis on new developments in this field and future perspectives. Lectures by the instructor and other faculty experts on various aspects of nanomaterials are followed by student lectures in areas of their own particular interest. These lectures then become the basis for students to create video presentations for broader dissemination.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6500 - Modeling of Materials: This course introduces basic concepts used in the modeling of material properties.  The course will include quantum mechanics, molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo and continuum level analysis, and multiscale methods as applied to the modeling of soft and hard matter. The methods are introduced in a computer laboratory environment. Open to graduates and qualified undergraduates.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Undergraduates must have junior standing or permission of the instructor.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6520 - Materials under Extreme Conditions: This course will review basic thermodynamic and kinetic concepts, which underpin how material behaves under extreme thermal, mechanical, chemical, electrical, and magnetic conditions as well as high-energy irradiations. Engineering materials that can withstand harsh environments and new materials with unique crystal structures and microstructures will be surveyed.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: MTLE 4520. Students cannot get credit for both 4520 and 6520.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6610 - Deformation Processing: Mechanical metallurgy and mechanics of the classical metal-working operations. Analytical techniques. Friction and lubrication. Workability. Effects on as-worked properties. Technological discussions of forging, rolling, extrusion, drawing, and other unit operations.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: ENGR 1600 or equivalent.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6750 - Special Topics in Ceramics: A course in physical ceramics, the content of which will be modified in accordance with current interests and technology.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6840 - Polymer Engineering: Survey and engineering analysis of industrial processes and commercial polymers. Topics include introductory fluid mechanics, non-Newtonian fluids, molecular theory of viscoelasticity, analysis of extrusion, and other selected processes.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6900 - Graduate Seminar: When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 0
MTLE 6930 - Literature Study: A special course assignment open to graduate students working toward a master’s degree. Applicable where a student cannot reasonably arrange to submit a thesis. A written report on the study must be submitted and defended before a committee of the faculty.Credit Hours: 1 to 3
MTLE 6940 - Materials Engineering Project: Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6960 - Topics in Materials Engineering: Credit Hours: 3
MTLE 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Masters program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
MTLE 6980 - Master’s Project: Active participation in a master’s-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the master’s project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the master’s project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the Library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
MTLE 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presented, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
MTLE 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the students research progress for the given semester. Once the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the library.Credit Hours: Variable
PHIL 1110 - Introduction to Philosophy: An introduction to the major areas of philosophy (ethics, theory of knowledge, philosophy of religion, etc.) and to some of the main problems treated within these fields. Selections from contemporary as well as classical authors are studied and discussed. Students are encouraged to develop a disciplined approach to intellectual problems. Emphasis varies with the instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 1120 - Minds and Machines: This course is an introduction to the philosophy of mind. Students will debate and write papers on the nature of mind, free will, personal identity, consciousness, artificial intelligence, and animal cognition. This is a communication-intensive course.<span style="font-size:12pt;"> When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with IHSS 1140; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 2100 - Critical Thinking: This course provides tools for the identification, analysis, and evaluation of the various patterns of reasoning as they occur in the real world. Patterns of reasoning include deductive reasoning, inductive reasoning, scientific reasoning, statistical reasoning, and causal reasoning. The course also covers some basic psychology and sociology of reasoning and belief, and concludes with a critical discussion of science and the scientific method.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PSYC 2100. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PSYC 2100.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 2120 - Introduction to Cognitive Science: This course is an introduction to the new and quickly growing field of Cognitive Science which studies the various aspects of cognition, including reasoning, learning, memory, and perception and action. Cognitive Science is a highly interdisciplinary field of study at the intersection of philosophy, psychology, computer science, linguistics, neuroscience, and anthropology, and the course hosts a number of guest lectures given by experts in these respective fields.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PSYC 2120. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PSYC 2120.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 2130 - Introduction to Philosophy of Science: How does science stimulate philosophical thinking and how has philosophy influenced science? This broad range of interaction is studied with special attention given to the concepts of theory, observation, and scientific method. Special attention is given to issues basic to psychology, in particular, reductionism, behaviorism, functionalism, and cognitivism. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 2140 - Introduction to Logic: Introduction to first-order logic as a tool to be used in engineering, computer science, philosophy, etc., and as procedural knowledge helpful in puzzle-solving environments (e.g., standardized tests). A hands-on laboratory component is included.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 2400 - Philosophy of Biology: This course addresses such issues as: Are species real entities in the world or just human constructs? Are biological phenomena reducible to physical processes or do irreducible biological features exist? What is the relationship between microevolution and macroevolution? Does sociobiology have something to contribute to our understanding of ethics? To what extent are the structures of the human mind products of evolution?When Offered: Spring or fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4



PHIL 2500 - Bioethics: This course involves a philosophical analysis of some of the basic moral issues raised by recent and anticipated developments in the areas of biology and medicine. The general question What are moral problems, and how does one resolve them? is examined in the context of concrete cases involving issues such as abortion, euthanasia, organ transplants, experimentation on human patients, cloning, genetic engineering, and behavior control and modification. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as STSH 4250. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and STSH 4250.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 2600 - Moral Development: An analysis of psychological research on how commonsense moral beliefs develop from early childhood through old age and their application to daily problems. A major focus is on the conflict between themes of justice or individual rights and caring compassion and its relation to gender differences (the Kohlberg/Gilligan debate). This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall or spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PSYC 2600. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PSYC 2600.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 2830 - Introduction to Philosophy of Religion: Central to philosophy is a careful examination of human reasons for holding their beliefs.Given the complexity/ineffability of religious experience, philosophy of religions examination of reasons is especially difficult.This course will analyze and evaluate Western monotheism both generally and as it relates to the traditional questions of faith and reason, the problem of evil, fate, and free will and the existence of miracles.Time permitting, non-Western as well as Western religions will be considered.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 2940 - Philosophy Studies: Independent study of a particular topic.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
PHIL 2960 - Topics in Philosophy: Experimental courses on subjects to be announced in advance.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
PHIL 4140 - Intermediate Logic: This course is a continuation of PHIL 2140, covering basic metatheory of logic (including formal syntax and semantics, model theory, and soundness and completeness of proof systems), applications of logic (including automated theorem proving, deductive problem solving, and the axiomatization of various branches of mathematics), and alternative systems of logic (including sequent systems, diagrammatic logic, and modal logic).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHIL 2140.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: MATH 4040.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 4240 - Ethics: A critical examination of traditional and contemporary works in ethical theory by considering what these theories have to say about how people should live, what rights and obligations they have, what things are intrinsically valuable. Typically this includes such topics as ethical and cultural relativism, egoism, freedom, and responsibility. Often the focus will be on contemporary issues such as war, abortion, equality, or punishment. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall or spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 4260 - Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence: This course may be roughly divided into two general areas: philosophical problems in AI and philosophical issues that arise because of AI. An example from the first area is the Knower Paradox, a paradox in which an apparently desirable formalism for handling an agents knowledge leads to inconsistency; an example from the second area is John Searles attack on so-called Strong AI by way of his Chinese Room argument, wherein he claims that because a computer at bottom just manipulates symbols it cannot genuinely understand.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHIL 2140.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 4300 - Environmental Philosophy: While concepts such as quality of life, environment, nature, global ecology, and the like figure heavily in contemporary discussions, they are seldom integrated into an environmental philosophy. The course tries to achieve this integration by understanding some of the religious, mythic-poetic, and scientific dimensions of the man-nature matrix. Some specific environmental problems are examined in order to illustrate the system of values implied by various solutions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: junior or senior standing or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as STSH 4340. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and STSH 4340.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 4310 - Scientific Revolutions: What is progress in science? How has the concept of progress been influenced by science? Are there significant differences between scientific and technological revolutions? These questions are explored in order to shed light on the complex dynamics of academic and industrial research.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHIL 1110 or PHIL 2130.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 4420 - Computability and Logic: A team-based, project-oriented, hands-on introduction to the great concepts and discoveries in logic and computability, including Turing Machines, first-order logic, the limitations of computing machines, Godels incompleteness results, and so forth. A hands-on laboratory component is included.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHIL 2140.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed with MATH 4030.  Students cannot received credit both this course and MATH 4030.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 4480 - Metaphysics and Consciousness: Daydreams about some tropical paradise  the smell of freshly baked bread  the flash of anger experienced when one person cuts another off  the vision of an albino squirrel on the campus green  Humans take all of these to involve activities or states of consciousness. But what is this consciousness with which they claim to be so intimately familiar? What are its metaphysical implications, and can people reconcile those implications with current scientific understanding of the world? This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: one course in philosophy.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 4740 - Philosophy of Law: The course examines the following questions: What is law? What is the relationship between law and morality? Is there a moral obligation not to break the law? Detailed examination is given to the concepts of liberty, justice, responsibility, and punishment.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: one philosophy or STS course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
PHIL 4940 - Topics in Philosophy: Experimental courses on subjects to be announced in advance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
PHIL 4990 - Capstone Experience in Philosophy: Students conduct original scholarly projects: original research, theoretical or analytical reviews of the literature, or computer simulations. Working either alone or in groups, students prepare written reports relating to this project, under the supervision of a faculty member.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of a supervising faculty member.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 3 to 6
PHYS 1010 - A Passion for Physics: A weekly one-hour seminar by physics department faculty members, in which they describe their scientific and research interests, at a level suitable for first-year college students. This course is graded satisfactory/unsatisfactory.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 1
PHYS 1050 - General PhysicsA one semester calculus-based overview of physics fundamentals with an emphasis on applications. Mechanics, including equilibrium and statics, fluids, oscillations, and waves. Basics of thermodynamics and heat flow. Electrical circuits. Electromagnetic radiation and optics. Recommended for all students who intend to take only one semester of physics. Credit cannot be obtained for both Physics 1050 and Physics 1100.
PHYS 1100 - Physics I: The first semester of a two-semester sequence of interactive courses. Topics include linear and angular kinematics and dynamics, work and energy, momentum and collisions, forces and fields, gravitation, oscillatory motion, waves, sound, and interference.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: MATH 1010 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  Credit cannot be obtained for both Physics 1050 and Physics 1100.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 1150 - Honors Physics I: Introductory physics for students seeking a more intensive experience. Newtons laws are introduced using differential calculus, with solutions based on integral calculus. Material on fluids, thermodynamics, and special relativity is included. Laboratory exercises are carried out emphasizing measurement uncertainty and clear, concise reporting. Recommended for students intending to major in physics. Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: MATH 1010.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 1200 - Physics II: The second semester of the two-semester sequence of interactive courses. Topics include electric and magnetic forces and fields, Gauss’s Law, dc and ac circuits, Ampere’s Law and Faraday’s Law, electromagnetic radiation, physical optics, and quantum physics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1100 or equivalent or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MATH 1020.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 1250 - Honors Physics II: Introductory physics for students seeking a more intensive experience. Electricity and magnetism is discussed making use of multivariable differentiation and integration. AC and DC circuits. Electromagnetic waves, optics, and selected topics in modern physics. Laboratory exercises are carried out emphasizing measurement uncertainty and clear, concise reporting. Recommended for students intending to major in physics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 1100 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.  Corequisite: MATH 1020.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 1500 - Physical Modeling: An introductory physics course in which students learn by constructing computer models of physical systems and then examining the behavior of the models. Whenever possible, the models will be compared to real systems. Spreadsheets will be the main tools used to construct the models, and no prior programming experience is required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: high school physics.When Offered: Consult department.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 1600 - Materials Science: Introduction to the scientific principles that dictate the structure and properties of engineering materials, including metals, ceramics, semiconductors, and polymers. Physical properties of materials (mechanical, electrical, thermal, optical) are discussed in terms of the underlying structure, spanning multiple length scales from atomic packing to micron scale defects in practical engineering materials. Throughout the course, the material behaviors are understood from the viewpoint of thermodynamics and kinetics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prequisites: CHEM 1100.When Offered: Fall and Spring term annually.Cross Listed: ENGR 1600, CHEM 1600, and ISCI 1600.  Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ENGR 1600, CHEM 1600, or ISCI 1600.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 5
PHYS 1960 - Topics in Physics: Credit Hours: 1
PHYS 2210 - Quantum Physics I: Introduction to the formalism of Special Relativity, Schrodinger wave mechanics, and spin-1/2 particles. Solutions to Schrodingers Equation in one, two, and three dimensions. One-electron atoms and quantum mechanical magnetic dipole moments.Prerequisites/Corequisites: PHYS 1200 or PHYS 1250, MATH 1020. When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 2220 - Quantum Physics IIApplications of special relativity and quantum theory to topics in modern physics. Atomic and molecular physics. Quantum statistics, blackbody radiation, and lasers. Crystalline solids. Superconductivity. Nuclear and particle physics. Astrophysics and cosmology.
PHYS 2350 - Experimental Physics: Experiments in mechanics, optics, electricity and electromagnetics, oscillations and waves, atomic, nuclear, and solid-state physics. Experimental methods, quantitative observations, and interpretation of data. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: PHYS 2220.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 9 contact hours
PHYS 2620 - Fundamentals of Optics: A survey of optics and optical phenomena and their applications. A modern laboratory is part of the course. Topics include geometrical optics and instruments, wave and Fourier optics, and polarization of light. Applications of modern optics to communications and manufacturing are stressed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 1200 or equivalent.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 2940 - Special Projects in Physics: Reading and study in various fields of physics to develop interest in and ability for independent study.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
PHYS 2960 - Topics in Physics: Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 2990 - Thesis: An independent investigation.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 3 or 4
PHYS 4100 - Introductory Quantum Mechanics: Quantum mechanics beyond Schrodinger wave mechanics. The postulates of quantum mechanics. Second quantization, Dirac notation, Hilbert spaces, perturbation theory, and applications to simple systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: PHYS 2220.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 4210 - Electromagnetic Theory: Field theory of electricity and magnetism with emphasis on solving boundary value problems. Dielectric and magnetic materials. Maxwells equations and wave propagation with applications to optics. Relativistic electrodynamics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: PHYS 2220 and MATH 4600.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 4240 - General Relativity: Introduction to the physics of gravitation and spacetime. Special relativity, tensor calculus, and relativistic electrodynamics. General relativity with selected applications of Einsteins field equations (gravitational time dilation; gravitational lensing; frame dragging; gravitational radiation). The physics of nonrotating and rotating black holes. Relativistic models for the large-scale structure of the Universe. Observational constraints on the cosmological parameters. Big Bang nucleosynthesis, the Cosmic Background Radiation. A culminating experience project is required. (Meets with ASTR 4240).Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 4330 and MATH 4600.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ASTR 4240. Students cannot receive credit for both PHYS 4240 and ASTR 4240.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 4330 - Theoretical Mechanics: Particle and rigid body dynamics using Newtonian, Lagrangian, and Hamiltonian methods. Motion of particle systems. Central force motion. Rotating coordinate systems. Rigid body motion using the inertia tensor and Euler angles. Coupled systems and normal coordinates. Introduction to continuum mechanics and the mechanics of deformable media. Introduction to Hamiltonian Mechanics, including proof and applications of Liouvilles Theorem. Formalism of Special Relativity. Introduction to nonlinear dynamics and chaotic behavior.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: PHYS 1250 or PHYS 1200, MATH 2400, and MATH 2010. Corerequisite: MATH 4600.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 4420 - Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics: The principles and physical applications of classical thermodynamics are developed. Basic concepts in classical and quantum statistical mechanics are introduced and their relations to thermodynamics are developed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: PHYS 2220, alsoMATH 2400, and MATH 2010.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 4510 - Quantum Mechanics I: <div>Classical mechanics: from Lagrangian to Hamiltonian, single particle formalism, small oscillations, normal modes, Hamilton-Jacobi theory, Hamiltons equation, review of wave mechanics: Schroedinger equation, barrier tunneling, quantum wells, Mathematical foundation of quantum mechanics: ket space, representations, observables, eigenstates and diagonization, quantum postulates, application of quantum postulates to two-level systems, harmonic oscillators, creation and annihilation operators. Quantization of angular momentum, spherical harmonics, rotation operators, Landau levels, central force: hydrogen atom. Path Integral formalism for quantum theory.Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PHYS 6510.</div>Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 4100 or equivalent.<span style="font-size: 12pt; color: black; font-family: &#34;Times New Roman&#34;;"> When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 4620 - Elementary Particle Physics: Survey of the elementary particles and their interactions. Historical introduction and discussion of experimental apparatus and particle accelerators. Relativistic kinematics and incorporation into quantum field theory, including Feynman diagrams. Bound states and the quark model. Symmetries and their manifestation. Neutrino oscillations and gauge theories. Quantum electrodynamics, the electroweak interaction, quantum chromodynamics, and prospects for grand unification. A culminating experience project is required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 4100.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 4630 - Lasers and Optical Systems: Optical physics and applications of lasers. Design of optical systems. Topics include: wave optics and beam propagation, Gaussian beams, resonators, optical properties of atoms and laser gain media, laser amplifiers, pulsed laser systems, applications of lasers, nonlinear optics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 2620 recommended.When Offered: Fall term odd-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed as ECSE 4630. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and ECSE 4630.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Three lecture hours and three laboratory hours per week.
PHYS 4640 - Optical Communications and Integrated Optics: Phenomena, materials, and devices for optical communications and computing. Topics include: guided wave and fiber optics, integrated optics, electro-optic and nonlinear optical switching, pulse and soliton propagation, sources and detectors.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 2620.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECSE 4640. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 4640.Credit Hours: 4Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Three lecture hours and three laboratory hours per week.
PHYS 4720 - Solid-State Physics: An introduction to theoretical and experimental solid-state physics. Wave mechanics in the perfect crystal. X-rays, electrons, and phonons. Electrical properties of metals and semiconductors. Qualitative treatment of lattice defects.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 2220 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ECSE 4720. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and ECSE 4720.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 4810 - Computational Physics: Computational physics studies the implementation of numerical algorithms to solve problems of physics which do not have analytical solutions. Upon completion of this course, students will be able to solve physics problems from a variety of fields under realistic conditions, using modern architectures such as graphical processing units and supercomputers. This course makes extensive use of computers but remains a physics course where students enrich their understanding of physical phenomena. A culminating experience project is required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: CSCI 1100, PHYS 1100, and PHYS 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 4910 - Culminating Experience Project: Independent study to accompany designated capstone courses in Physics and Astronomy. Designated courses are: ASTR 4220 Astrophysics; ASTR 4240 Gravitation and Cosmology; ASTR 4510 Origins of LIfe: a Cosmic Perspective; PHYS 4810 Computational Physics; PHYS 4620 Elementary Particle Physics; PHYS 4240 General Relativity; ASTR 4120 Observational Astronomy; PHYS 4630 Lasers and Optical Systems; PHYS 4640 Optical Communications and Integrated Optics; PHYS 4720 Solid State Physics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Corequisite: Must be concurrently registered in one of the following: ASTR 4120, ASTR 4220, ASTR 4240, ASTR 4510, PHYS4240, PHYS 4620, PHYS4630, PHYS4640, or PHYS4720, PHYS 4810, or by instructor permission.Credit Hours: 1
PHYS 4960 - Topics in Physics: Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 6410 - Electrodynamics: Electrostatics and magnetostatics. Relativistic kinematics. Relativistic dynamics. Relativistic theory of classical fields. Electromagnetic waves. Linear and nonlinear materials. EM waves in linear, dispersive media. EM waves in nonlinear materials. Diffraction. Radiation by relativistic particles.  Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of the instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 6510 - Quantum Mechanics I: <div>Classical mechanics: from Lagrangian to Hamiltonian, single particle formalism, small oscillations, normal modes, Hamilton-Jacobi theory, Hamiltons equation, review of wave mechanics: Schroedinger equation, barrier tunneling, quantum wells, mathematical foundation of quantum mechanics: ket space, representations, observables, eigenstates and diagonization, quantum postulates, application of quantum postulates to two-level systems, harmonic oscillators, creation and annihilation operators. Quantization of angular momentum, spherical harmonics, rotation operators, Landau levels, central force: hydrogen atom. Path integral formalism for quantum theory.Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PHYS 4510.</div>Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PHYS 4100 or equivalent.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 6520 - Quantum Mechanics II: Intrinsic spins, Pauli matrices, spinors. Addition of angular momenta, Clebsch-Gordon coefficients, Wigner-Eckart Theorems, applications. Approximate treatments: variation methods, overlap integrals, Block wavelength. WKB methods. Stationary perturbation, degeneracy. Fine structure and hyperfine structure in atoms. Approximations for time dependent problems: Fermi-Golden rules. Classical fields: Lagrangian density, variational principle, field equations, normal modes. Field quantization: quantization of continuous systems, EM radiation, photons, EM-atom coupling, spontaneous emission. Relativistic single particle: Dirac equation, free space solution, central force solution. <span style="font-size: 12pt; color: black; font-family: &#34;Times New Roman&#34;;"><span style="background: yellow none repeat scroll 0% 50%; -moz-background-clip: -moz-initial; -moz-background-origin: -moz-initial; -moz-background-inline-policy: -moz-initial;"><span style="font-size: 12pt; color: black;"><br />
PHYS 6530 - Quantum Mechanics III: Relativistic wave equations. Commutation relations and the quantization of free fields. Spin and statistics of Bose and Fermi fields. Interacting fields and commutation relations. Interaction representation and S-matrix perturbation theory. Renormalization theory and applications in quantum electrodynamics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 6520.When Offered: Consult department about when offered.Credit Hours: 3
PHYS 6590 - Statistical Mechanics: Review of thermodynamics, probability, and statistics. Statistical basis of thermodynamics, various ensembles, quantum statistics. Ideal Fermi and Bose gases and applications to solids and the black-body radiation. Interacting systems, phase transitions, and critical phenomena. Phase transition in the Van der Waals gas and in the Ising ferromagnet. Mean-field approximation and Landau theory of continuous phase transitions. Random walk, diffusion, Brownian motion, and Langevin equation. Stochastic processes.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 6510.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PHYS 6710 - Theory of Solids I: An introduction to the theory of solids. Theory of the free-electron metal, band theory, and phonons. Application to the electrical, optical, and thermal properties of solids. Qualitative discussion of cohesion.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 6520.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
PHYS 6720 - Theory of Solids II: More detailed application of solid-state theory to electrical, magnetic, and optical properties of matter. Consideration of particular materials; semiconductors, ferrites, ferroelectrics, and superconductors.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 6710.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
PHYS 6810 - Nonlinear and Quantum Optics: Theoretical framework for analysis of wave propagation in nonlinear media. Classical and quantum theory of nonlinear response. Multi-wave mixing, including second-harmonic generation, optical phase conjugation and optical bistability. Quantization of the electromagnetic field and quantum stochastic processes in atom-field interactions. Applications to amplifiers, lasers, resonance fluorescence, and squeezed state generation. Quantum theory of measurements.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PHYS 6510.When Offered: Consult department about when offered.Credit Hours: 3
PHYS 6900 - Seminar: Selected topics.Credit Hours: to be arranged
PHYS 6940 - Readings in Physics: Supervised reading and study in various fields of physics.Credit Hours: 3
PHYS 6960 - Topics in Physics: Credit Hours: Variable
PHYS 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Masters program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
PHYS 6980 - Masters Project: Active participation in a masters-level project under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a masters project report. Grades of IP are assigned until the masters project has been approved by the faculty adviser. If recommended by the adviser, the masters project may be accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
PHYS 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presented, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
PHYS 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Variable
PSYC 1200 - General Psychology: An introduction to psychology. Topics covered vary with instructor but may include physiological bases of behavior, sensation, perception, learning, memory, child and adult development, motivation, personality, psychological disorders, social behavior. Introduction to basic methods of psychological research is a course requirement that can be met in several ways (described during the first class meeting). There is a significant experiential component that varies with the instructor but will include interactive computer stimulations, class demonstrations, group projects.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 2100 - Critical Thinking: This course provides tools for the identification, analysis, and evaluation of the various patterns of reasoning as they occur in the real world. Patterns of reasoning include deductive reasoning, inductive reasoning, scientific reasoning, statistical reasoning, and causal reasoning. The course also covers some basic psychology and sociology of reasoning and belief, and concludes with a critical discussion of science and the scientific method.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PHIL 2100. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PHIL 2100.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 2120 - Introduction to Cognitive Science: This course is an introduction to the new and quickly growing field of Cognitive Science which studies the various aspects of cognition, including reasoning, learning, memory, and perception and action. Cognitive Science is a highly interdisciplinary field of study at the intersection of philosophy, psychology, computer science, linguistics, neuroscience, and anthropology, and the course hosts a number of guest lectures given by experts in these respective fields.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PHIL 2120. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PHIL 2120.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 2220 - Human Factors in Design: This course provides a broad introduction to the theories and principles of human performance, man-machine interfaces, and systems designs. It also emphasizes the applications of these theories and principles to the design of controls, work space, data entry devices, training systems, and the human-computer interface.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PSYC 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Offered spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 2310 - Research Methods and Statistics I: This course, the first in a two-course sequence, provides an introduction to basic methods of behavioral and social science research, including experimental, quasi-experimental and non-experimental research designs, psychometric considerations (e.g., reliability, validity, control, importance, levels of measurement), approaches to data collection and analysis, and communication of results. Students will demonstrate their understanding of the topics covered by writing a detailed research proposal formatted according to American Psychological Association (APA) guidelines. Students will also gain experience in using a selection of parametric (e.g., correlation, simple and multiple regression, ANOVA) and non-parametric (e.g., Chi-square Test of Independence, Mann-Whitney U, Wilcoxon T, Kruskal-Wallis, Friedmans ANOVA) statistical procedures. Data analysis will be carried out using SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences). This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: PSYC 1200 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 2600 - Moral Development: An analysis of psychological research on how our common sense moral beliefs develop from early childhood through old age, and their application to daily problems. A major focus is on the conflict between themes of justice or individual rights and caring compassion and its relation to gender differences (the Kohlberg/Gilligan debate).When Offered: Offered spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PHIL 2600. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PHIL 2600.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 2730 - Social Psychology: This is a survey course covering theories, methods, and empirical research on personal and situational factors influencing social behavior. Topics covered include social perception, the construction of social reality, decision making, group influences on behavior, and attitudes. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 2800 - Introduction to Sports Psychology: An introduction to psychology as applied to sport; the topics covered include history of sport behavior, principles of learning and their application, anxiety and arousal, motivation, leadership, cohesion, audience effects, aggression, personality assessment, female athletes, youth in sport, coach behavior, and physical activity for all.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4110 - Motivation and Performance: This course encompasses a broad spectrum of theories concerned with the biological, psychological, and social components of motivation. Throughout the course, students relate theoretical issues to both recent research evidence and potential practical applications to enhance performance. Group projects, focus group discussions, and interactive guest speakers are used to establish links between theory and performance.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4160 - Human Factors Seminar: A comprehensive, project-oriented survey of special topics in human factors. Applied, experimental, and/or field research will be required.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 2220 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon sufficient demand.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4170 - Professional Development II: Leadership Theories: This course examines the major theories of leadership, as well as provides the opportunity to apply these theories to actual or symbolic leaders. Students wishing to become effective managers or leaders will benefit from this course, since the focus is on providing students with information about the traits, behaviors, power and influence, and charisma of effective leaders.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  ENGR 2050. Restricted to junior and senior engineering majors.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 2
PSYC 4200 - Industrial and Organizational Psychology: A broad introduction to the field of Industrial and Organizational Psychology. Topics covered include personnel selection, job analysis, training, performance appraisal, work-related attitudes, employee motivation, leadership, decision making, and organizational theory.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4260 - Psychological Tests and Measurements: Methods, techniques, and instruments for measuring individual differences are surveyed. Topics include representative methods of test construction, a critical analysis of representative tests, criteria for evaluating and selecting tests, and the value and limitations of tests.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4310 - Research Methods and Statistics II: This course is the second in a two-semester sequence on research methods and statistics in the behavioral sciences. Students will learn how to analyze data using multiple regression, analysis of variance, factor analysis, principal component analysis, and multi-level linear modeling. Additional procedures (e.g., structural equation modeling, alternatives to null hypothesis significance testing) will be covered if time permits. Students will also gain proficiency with the R programming language and software environment for statistical computing. Each student will carry out a research project and prepare a formal report that comports with the guidelines from the American Psychological Association. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200 and/or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4320 - Behavioral Neuroscience: This course is an introduction to the role of physiological mechanisms in behavioral processes. There will be detailed examination and discussion of the involvement of biological systems in feeding and drinking, sexual behavior, sleep and arousal, learning and memory, psychopathology and psychopharmacology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PSYC 1200 or PHIL/PSYC 2120.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4330 - Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience: This survey course is intended as an introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience. The topics covered will focus on exploring the neural underpinnings for cognitive processes, such as sensation, language, attention, motor control, executive functions, social communication, emotions, consciousness, and learning/memory.  Basic aspects of nervous system function and neuroanatomy, brain development/evolution, structural and functional imaging techniques, and other research methods used in Cognitive Neuroscience will be discussed.
PSYC 4340 - Human Sexuality: This course provides biological, cultural, historical, and psychological perspectives of sexuality. Basic information on human development and reproductive physiology is provided. In addition, current topics such as marriage, alternate lifestyles, contraception, and pornography are discussed. Small group focus discussions, media-based discussions, and interactive guest speakers are used to link course material to responsible sexuality and understanding of diversity.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4370 - Cognitive Psychology: The focus of this course is on the flow of information from sensory input to retrieval from long-term memory. Within this framework, topics such as mnemonics, pattern recognition, attention, computer simulation, reasoning, and the relationship between culture and thought are discussed.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PSYC 1200 or PHIL/PSYC 2100.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4400 - Personality: Modern theories of personality are presented and compared. Using these theories, students analyze the processes by which people cope with intrapsychic, interpersonal, and institutional demands. Evidence on adaptive processes from clinical, field, and laboratory studies is evaluated. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4410 - Sensation and Perception: What are the processes that allow us to detect information about our surroundings, recognize people and objects, and perceive depth and motion? This course will focus on the physiological and neural mechanisms underlying sensation (sight, hearing, and touch), the qualitative aspects of human perceptual experience, and how perception and action are interconnected. Color perception, object recognition, space and motion perception, and perception and action are all examined.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PSYC 1200 or PHIL/PSYC 2120.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4450 - Learning: The first half of this course is devoted to presentation of traditional theories of learning. Classical and operant conditioning and single-subject methodology are studied in depth. During the second half of the course, students apply their knowledge of operant conditioning principles in the context of a group-based field study.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4500 - Drugs, Society, and Behavior: This course is an exploration of the social and psychological effects of extensive use of pharmacological agents that are salient to daily behavior. There is an emphasis on the effects of addictive drugs such as alcohol, heroin, and cocaine.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4510 - Cognitive Modeling: Cognitive modeling investigates human cognition by developing computational systems that simulate cognitive processes. Cognitive modeling grew out of Cognitive Psychology and Artificial Intelligence. Cognitive models are used in a number of basic and applied domains including Human-Computer Interaction, Intelligent Tutoring Systems, Computer-Generated Forces, and Synthetic Characters. In this course, students will develop models in ACT-R (a unified theory of cognition) that simulate recent findings in cognitive psychology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: PSYC 1200 or PHIL/PSYC 2120 and CSCI 2300. Recommended: CSCI 4150 and/or PSYC 4370 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4600 - Cognition and the Brain: Perception and thought are considered in terms of processes represented in the brain. The localization and lateralization of function are examined, drawing upon research on the behavioral effects of brain damage as well as brain-imaging studies and other approaches. Examples of topics include object recognition, memory, language, emotion, spatial ability, and motor processes.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PSYC 1200 or COGS 4330 or PSYC 4330 or premission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COGS 4600; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4610 - Stress and the Brain: This seminar course is a detailed examination of the mind-brain relationship, through study of the stress response. Stress is simply defined as any challenge to an individuals homeostasis, or balance. This course will explore the neurobiological underpinnings of the stress response, with particular focus on how stressors can alter perception, affective and cognitive processing in the individual, which can in turn feedback to alter the general health of the individual (body and mind/brain).
PSYC 4620 - Cognitive Engineering: Covers cognitive theory from an applied perspective to understand and predict the interactions among human cognition, artifact (i.e. tools), and task. Cognitive task analysis techniques will be taught and used throughout the course, as well techniques for collecting and analyzing fine-grained behavioral data. Topics covered may include visual search and visual attention, cognitive skills and its acquisition, hard and soft constraints on interactive behavior, human error, soft constraints on judgment and decision-making, and experts and expertise.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: PSYC/PHIL 2120 or PSYC 4370 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with COGS 4620. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and COGS 4620.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4720 - Abnormal Psychology: The definition, history, major schools of thought, and models of the normal and abnormal personality are presented. Disorders are examined within the framework of D.S.M. and competing schools of thought. The description, etiology, treatment, including pharmacologic, and prevention of each of the disorders are considered. Illustrative cases are presented. Students write a paper on a topic, approved by the instructor, that focuses upon the impact of public policies on psychopathology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4730 - Positive PsychologyPositive Psychology is the scientific study of human happiness, well-being, and strength of character. This course takes an empirical approach to helping individuals use the science of flourishing to enhance their lives. Resiliency, the ability to adapt to stress and adversity, will be emphasized. Students will learn about coping techniques of resiliency to effectively navigate through life situations.
PSYC 4740 - Psychology and The Law: Since the 1950s, social science researchers have turned their attention to the courtroom, in order to test theories of human behavior in a real world application. Are the basic assumptions underlying the practice of law in this country valid, given what psychologists know about the fundamentals of human behavior? This course will provide students with instruction regarding how the study of psychology can contribute to a better understanding of the legal system.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4750 - Forensic Psychology: A practical introduction to the field of forensic psychology, a domain within psychology concerned with the production and application of psychological knowledge to the civil and criminal justice systems. This course explores the many ways in which psychological principles play an increasingly important role in influencing various processes and outcomes associated with the field of law.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 4740.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4770 - Psychopharmacology and Behavioral Toxicology: This course is a detailed examination of the neuroscience and psychology inherent to the development of pharmacological agents for treating psychopathology. There is also an exploration of chemicals that are toxic to the brain as manifested by induction of psychopathology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4800 - Sport Psychology Seminar: This course expands on topics covered in Introduction to Sport Psychology. Students in the course will work in small groups to identify and read literature in a course-relevant area of their choice. In addition to weekly written progress reports, students will prepare a final report that must be presented orally in class.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  PSYC 1200, PSYC 2800, or permission of instructor. Maximum enrollment: 24.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
PSYC 4940 - Readings in Psychology: An individually arranged independent study course under the supervision of a member of the Psychology Department. The topic is selected by consultation between student and faculty member.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200 and/or permission of supervising faculty member.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
PSYC 4960 - Topics in Psychology: An advanced course concerned with selected topics in psychology.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  PSYC 1200 or permission of instructor.Credit Hours: 1 to 4
PSYC 4990 - Undergraduate Thesis: Students conduct original scholarly projects: original research, theoretical or analytical reviews of the literature, or computer simulations. Working either alone or in groups, students prepare written reports relating to this project, under the supervision of a faculty member. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of a supervising faculty member.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 3 to 6
STSH 1110 - Science, Technology, and Society: An introduction to the social, historical, and ethical influences on modern science and technology. Cases include development of the atomic bomb, mechanization of the workplace, Apollo space program, and others. Readings are drawn from history, fiction, and social sciences; films and documentary videos highlight questions about the application of scientific knowledge to human affairs. The class is designed to give students freedom to develop and express their own ideas. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as STSS 1110. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and STSS 1110.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 1200 - Sustainability Debates: Efforts to advance environmental sustainability have provoked intense and complicated political debate. In this course, students analyze key stakeholders, issues, and alternative pathways for the future.  They also participate in a series of oral debates, focused on environmental regulation, economic growth, industrialism and globalization.  Students also work in a group to develop a proposal for a project that responds to concern about environmental sustainability. Throughout the course, students are encouraged to develop (and critically reflect on) their own environmental values and ideas.
STSH 1600 - History and Culture of Games: This course surveys 5000 years of game history, from ancient Sumeria to the latest next-generation consoles and MMOGs. In parallel with this historical tour, several major theories will be examined about the nature of play and the nature of games. Along the way we will also look at how games and play influence the cultures they are found in, and how culture in turn influences how people structure their leisure time will also be considered. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: With COMM 1600 and STSS 1600. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and either COMM 1600 or STSS 1600.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 2310 - A Century of Environmental Thought: This course examines the emergence of environmental consciousness in the United States throughout the 20th century. Students in this course will study the original writings of some of the most important thinkers and activists in the history of environmentalism, examine the social contexts in which their ideas formed, and consider their relevance to contemporary sustainability issues.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: STSS 1110 or IHSS 1240 (Environment &amp; Politics) or IHSS 196x (Politics of Global Environment) or IHSS 1110 (Nature/Society) or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed with STSS 2310.  Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 2320 - Environment and Law: This is an introductory environmental law and policy course, with emphasis on the practical use and application of legal concepts.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 2410 - Century of the Gene: This course details the scientific and social history of genetics, from Darwin and Mendel to the Human Genome Project. Special focus areas include: plant and animal breeding in the early twentieth century; eugenics movements in the U.S. and elsewhere; bacterial and fruit fly genetics; the development of molecular biology; the invention of recombinant-DNA technologies; the emergence of the biotechnology industry; the sociobiology controversies; genetics and evolutionary theory; and the Human Genome Project and contemporary genomics.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4



STSH 2940 - Readings in Science and Technology Studies: With an individual faculty member on an agreed-upon topic.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 2960 - Topics in Science and Technology Studies: Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4120 - How to Read the New York Times: This is a course in critical media literacy. The theory and practice of critical media literacy is exolored by learning social scientific and humanistic models, approaches, and techniques for making sense of the news (and other media), newswriting, and newsgathering, and through daily reading of the New York Times. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: one 1000- or 2000-level HASS course.When Offered: Summer term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with STSS 4120; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4210 - Engineering Ethics: This course explores the ethical issues that engineers encounter in their professional practice. It also examines social values and law and policy issues that shape engineering and technological decision making. Using case studies, professional codes of conduct, and scholarly literature, the course examines the responsibilities of engineers in relation to their employers, clients, co-professionals, and their responsibility for public safety and welfare. Topics include the history of engineering, professionalism vs. the demands of business, engineering vs. management decision making, whistle-blowing, proprietary rights and trade secrecy, and conflicts of interest.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: STSH 1110/STSS 1110, STSS 2400, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability  of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4250 - Bioethics: This course explores historical perspectives on bioethics through concrete cases and practical problems faced in the design and execution of some of the highest profile biomedical research and most consequential clinical decisions of the twentieth century. Topics include vaccine development; human radiation experiments; new genetic and reproductive technologies; right-to-die, death-with-dignity, and physician-assisted suicide; human experimentation, including prisoners, the sick, and the disabled; neuroethics; animal reserach; and emergent topics such as stem cell research, prenatal diagnostics, and genetic testing. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites:  STSH/STSS 1110.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4310 - Energy Politics: Through lectures and in-class discussions, this course explores the history, domestic and international politics, policy, philosophy, economics, environmental consequences, media coverage of, and alternatives to, the US addiction to fossil fuels. Students, who may earn either humanities or social science credit, maintain analytical blogs with twice-weekly posts or write and present semester-length research papers, take a midterm exam and a comprehensive final exam. This is a communication-intensive course. Satisfies the PD II Requirement.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: STSH/S 1110 or STSS 2300 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered years.Cross Listed: Cross listed with STSS 4310; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4340 - Environmental Philosophy: While concepts such as quality of life, environment, nature, global ecology, and the like figure heavily in contemporary discussions, they are seldom integrated into an environmental philosophy. The course tries to achieve this integration by understanding some of the religious, mythic-poetic, and scientific dimensions of the human-nature matrix. Some specific environmental problems are examined to illustrate the system of values implied by various solutions.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: junior or senior standing or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Cross Listed: Cross listed as PHIL 4300. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and PHIL 4300.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4430 - Drugs in History: This course teaches basic historical, anthropological, and sociological concepts that can be used to make sense of a wide variety of contemporary phenomena students encounter in everyday life. The focus is on analyzing how licit and illicit drugs serve as technologies within specific social contexts or subcultures; what drug policy reveals about social, political, and economic organization; and the impacts of biomedical knowledge and practice on specific population groups. The course focuses on the representation of drug use and drug users in popular culture, science and medicine, and history and the social sciences.  This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: 1000-level course (or higher) in STS.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as STSS 4430.  Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and STSS 4430.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4510 - History of American Technology: Discusses the growth of American technology and its place within the framework of American history as well as the interrelationship of American and foreign technological developments. This course stresses the cultural contexts of technological change. Topics covered include the Erie Canal, the American system of manufacturing, railroads, emergence of engineering professions, corporate R&amp;D, household technology, the technology of modern warfare, and the electronics revolution.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: one course in American history or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4610 - Product Design and Innovation Studio V: PDI Studio V focuses on an enriched sense of program and user needs definition through methodologies of the humanities and social sciences. Studio projects, presentations and readings explore the relation of race, class, and gender to technology, and the potential of design to address societal problems. The course has often focused on incorporating information technology in educational tools for low-income primary school students.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: ENGR 2020, IHSS 2500, and ENGR 2050.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4720 - Consumer Culture: What is consumer culture? What are its roots, its consequences, and alternatives? Documentaries and the research of anthropologists, historians, and religious scholars examine consumer culture in the US and UK including recognition of the global locations in which our consumer goods are made. Topics include buying and selling, shopping, retail, manufacture, material culture, pricing, consumer goods, disposal, kinship, identity, exchange, and advertising, with attention paid to differences in race, class, and gender.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: any 1000- or 2000-level STS course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with STSS 4720.  Students cannot receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4800 - Public Service/Professional Careers Internships: This course offers an insight into the public policy process from the vantage point of a part-time internship in the public or private sector as well as an opportunity to explore a career option before actually embarking upon it. The following is a partial list of the large number of possible internships: airport planning, architecture, banking, biological research, clinical psychology, computer science, consumer protection, corporate management, engineering, environmental planning, geology, local government, materials and mechanical engineering, noise pollution abatement, personnel management review, premedical, public finance and taxation, public health management, public relations, social work, state legislature, stock market, transportation planning, and urban planning.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: STSH 1110/STSS 1110; IHSS 1960; or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as STSS 4800. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and STSS 4800.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4940 - Readings in Science and Technology Studies: With an individual faculty member on an agreed-upon topic.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4960 - Topics in Science and Technology Studies: Credit Hours: 4
STSH 4980 - Senior Project: Ordinarily consists of independent research, supervised by a faculty member, culminating in a written thesis. A creative endeavor such as a videotape or computer program may be substituted with departmental permission. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSH 6940 - Readings in Science and Technology Studies: With an individual faculty member on an agreed-upon topic.Credit Hours: 3
STSH 6960 - Topics in Science and Technology Studies: Credit Hours: 3
STSH 6970 - Professional Project: Active participation in a semester-long project, under the supervision of a faculty adviser. A Professional Project often serves as a culminating experience for a Professional Masters program but, with departmental or school approval, can be used to fulfill other program requirements. With approval, students may register for more than one Professional Project. Professional Projects must result in documentation established by each department or school, but are not submitted to the Office of Graduate Education and are not archived in the library. Grades of A, B, C, or F are assigned by the faculty adviser at the end of the semester. If not completed on time, a formal Incomplete grade may be assigned by the faculty adviser, listing the work remaining to be completed and the time limit for completing this work.
STSS 1110 - Science, Technology, and Society: An introduction to the social, historical, and ethical influences on modern science and technology. Cases include development of the atomic bomb, mechanization of the workplace, Apollo space program, and others. Readings are drawn from history, fiction, and social sciences; films and documentary videos highlight questions about the application of scientific knowledge to human affairs. The class is designed to give students freedom to develop and express their own ideas. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as STSH 1110. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and STSH 1110.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 1200 - Sustainability Debates: Efforts to advance environmental sustainability have provoked intense and complicated political debate. In this course, students analyze key stakeholders, issues, and alternative pathways for the future. They also participate in a series of oral debates, focused on environmental regulations, economic growth, industrialism, and globalization. Students also work in a group to develop a proposal that responds to concern about environemtal sustainability. Throughout the course, students are encouraged to develop (and critically reflect on) their own environmental values and ideas.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 1330 - International Relations: The world today faces enormous problems: the bloody horrors of war, the unconscionable and widening economic gap between rich and poor countries, and the looming threat of catastrophic environmental degradation. This course examines the causes and consequences of these problems, wonders what a world beyond greed and hate would look like, and considers what it will take to build a better world. Toward these ends, several themes are explored, including the nature of the international system, contemporary challenges to the state system, and alternatives to hunger, exploitation, and international violence.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 1510 - Cultural Anthropology: An introduction to human societies and cultures in comparative perspective, from tribal societies to complex societies such as the United States. Emphasis on ethnographic descriptions of other cultures such as on the interpretation of cultural symbolism and on topical issues such as medical anthropology.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 1520 - Sociology: A study of the principles and concepts of sociology and their application to the study of society and self. Students are introduced to the scope, materials, and methods of sociology. The issues and problems to be studied come from basic social institutions such as the family, science, and religion. Other topics may include love, crime, political economy, power, population growth, social class, and minority and ethnic relations.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 1600 - History and Culture of Games: This course surveys 5000 years of game history, from ancient Sumeria to the latest next-generation consoles and MMOGs. In parallel with this historical tour, several major theories will be examined about the nature of play and the nature of games. Along the way we will also look at how games and play influence the cultures they are found in, and how culture in turn influences how people structure their leisure time will also be considered. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: With COMM 1600 and STSH 1600. Students cannot receive credit for both this course and either COMM 1600 or STSH 1600.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 1960 - Topics in Science and Technology Studies, Anthropology/ Archaeology, History, Political Science, or Sociology: Credit Hours: 4
STSS 2210 - Design, Culture, and Society: This course allows students to develop a critical understanding of the relationships between design, culture, and society. Design is defined broadly, touching on product/industrial design, urban design, and so-called alternative design approaches such as ecological and feminist design. The focus is on the role of design in contemporary culture with the goal of training students emerging appreciation of design as cultural practice on their professional work as engineers, architects, or business managers. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 2290 - American Politics in Crisis: Analyzes the workings of major institutions in American society and politics during a period in which key parts of our society seem dysfunctional, having lost their integrity and ability solve problems. Through a careful reading of texts in political science and social criticism we discuss symptoms, causes, and possible remedies. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 2300 - Environment and Society: Society and the natural environment are crucially linked in a number of ways. Environmental problems such as pollution and natural resource depletion are not only problems for society, affecting the way we live our lives; they are also problems of society—the result of patterns of social organization and social practices. In this course, we will explore these society/environment interactions at various levels, from the local to the global, using the concepts and insights of environmental sociology. Environmental sociologists aim to understand the social origins of environmental problems and propose workable solutions to them. By showing how social interaction, institutions, and beliefs shape human behavior, environmental sociology provides a useful complement to the natural sciences in the analysis of the environmental problems faced today.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  STSH 1110/STSS 1110 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 2310 - A Century of Environmental Thought: This course examines the emergence of environmental consciousness in the United States throughout the 20th century. Students in this course will study the original writings of some of the most important thinkers and activists in the history of environmentalism, examine the social contexts in which their ideas formed, and consider their relevance to contemporary sustainability issues.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: STSS 1110 or IHSS 1240 (Environment and Politics) or IHSS 196x (Politics of Global Environment) or IHSS 1110 (Nature/Society) or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with STSH 2310.  Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 2350 - Law, Values, and Public Policy: Perspectives on Science and Technology: This course examines the interconnections between values and law, seeking to understand how these affect and are affected by science and technology by examining such topics as computers and privacy, medical malpractice, abortion, and other legal conflicts surrounding new reproductive technologies, problems of expert witnesses, sexual harassment, patent infringement, auto safety litigation, and siting of hazardous facilities, among others. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Upon availablity of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 2400 - Medicine and Society: The purpose is to explore the contributions of anthropology, sociology, and history to health and illness. By the end of the course, students will have an overall picture of health fields, problems faced by patients and caregivers, medicine and health in non-Western societies, and the social shaping of disease and therapeutic choices.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 2940 - Readings in Science and Technology Studies, Anthropology/Archaeology, History, Political Science, or Sociology: With an individual faculty member on an agreed-upon topic.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 2960 - Topics in Science and Technology Studies: Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4120 - How to Read the New York Times: This is a course in critical media literacy. The theory and practice of critical media literacy is explored by learning social scientific and humanistic models, approaches, and techniques for making sense of the news (and other media), newswriting, and newsgathering, and through daily reading of the New York Times. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: One 1000-or 2000-level HASS course.When Offered: Summer term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with STSH 4120; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4260 - Food, Farms, and Famine: This course provides students with a wide-ranging understanding of the environmental and social context of food, agriculture, and hunger. Drawing primarily on sociological concepts and research, the class will take a food systems approach, analyzing food as it travels from farm to table as part of an interconnected process. Students will examine why humans eat the way they do and how individuals food choices affect other people and the environment.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: any 2000-level STSS course or permission of instructor.
STSS 4270 - Sustainability Problems: In this course, students will map the matrix of problems that make sustainability difficult – problems with the U.S. political, legal, and educational system, with media, culture, and individual behavior. Students will also identify sustainability pathways in transportation, urban design, education, alternative energy, etc. Throughout, students will analyze and try to produce effective environmental communication.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: any 2000-level STSS course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4280 - Sustainability Education: This course examines needs for and challenges of delivering environmental education in different settings. Students critically review existing environmental education curricula then design and deliver their own to K-12 students. The history of public education in the United States, factors shaping contemporary education, various approaches to environmental education, and the complex challenge of interdisciplinary curriculum design are examined. Students in the course develop and demonstrate their own educational and environmental values.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: one 1000-or 2000-level STSH/S course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4310 - Energy Politics: Through lectures and in-class discussions, this course explores the history, domestic and international politics, policy, philosophy, economics, environmental consequences, media coverage of, and alternatives to, the US addiction to fossil fuels. Students, who may earn either humanities or social science credit, maintain analytical blogs with twice-weekly posts or write and present semester-length research papers, take a midterm exam and a comprehensive final exam. This is a communication intensive course. Satisfies the PDI II Requirement.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: STSH/S 1110 or STSS 2300 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with STSH 4310; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4330 - 21st Century Risks—Robotics, Nanotechnology, Cloning, and Other Technologies: This course covers two main types of technological risk: (1) innovating in ways that endanger health, quality of life, environment, or other goals; and (2) failing to pursue innovations that people need. Some understanding of the technical details is a prerequisite for making sense of emerging technologies, but the course focuses more on media, public opinion, political decision making, technologists incentives, and other social issues. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: STSH/STSS 1110 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4350 - Politics of Design: A research seminar exploring the meaning of design in engineering, architecture, political theory, and other fields. How do social ideals and motives inspire design choices? To what extent does the design of human-made things shape the quality of public life? A variety of objects are studied: buildings, machines, artifacts in everyday use, computer programs, political constitutions, etc.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: any 2000-level course in STS or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4370 - Environmental Politics and Policy: A highly interactive introduction to environmental politics and policy in the United States. Major themes include the background and context of environmental politics and policy, the policy-making process, environmental issues selected and reported on by students, the varieties of environmentalism, and environmental ethics.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: any 2000-level STS course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4430 - Drugs in History: This course teaches basic historical, anthropological, and sociological concepts that can be used to make sense of a wide variety of contemporary phenomena students encounter in everyday life. The focus is on analyzing how licit and illicit drugs serve as technologies within specific social contexts or subcultures; what drug policy reveals about social, political, and economic organization; and the impacts of biomedical knowledge and practice on specific population groups. Also a focus is the representation of drug use and drug users in popular culture, science and medicine, and history and the social sciences. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: 1000-level course (or higher) in STS.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as STSH 4430.  Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and STSH 4430.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4500 - Globalization and Development: This course surveys the actors, processes, and proposed solutions to the problems of environment and development. The theory and practice of three main themes are explored: the background and context of environment in North and South; politics and economic development in the south; and the problems and prospects for sustainable societies in North and South.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: STSS 2300 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term, odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4560 - Gender, Science, and Technology: “Sex” is the biological distinction between being male and female. “Gender” is the social construction of masculinity and femininity. The purpose of this course is to explore if, and if so, how, science and technology reciprocally contribute to and are shaped by gender ideals and images. Gender is used as a tool for critical thinking about such topics as studies of sex differences, women in science and engineering, the environment, and war and peace.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: STSH 1110/STSS 1110 or permission of instructor.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4580 - Self-Organization in Science and Society: Self-organization has become increasingly important in science and engineering. Self-assembly of molecular structures are critical to nanotechnology; self-organizing swarms of insects are modeled in biology and robotics, and so on. But recursive loops in which things govern themselves are also foundational to society. Indigenous societies are renowned for their ecological self-stabilization. Wikipedia, Open Sources Software, and other means of crowdsourcing offer new visions for a more democratic civil society.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: any course with an STSH/STSS designation or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4610 - PDI Studio VI: The sixth design studio for non-engineering majors participating in the interdisciplinary programs in Design and Innovation, this course introduces students to organizational dimensions of new concept design, development, and dissemination, including entrepreneurship, organization planning, product management, and branding and marketing. The course requires students to synthesize social, technical, business, and formal concerns in the design of innovative objects, environments, or systems.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: STSH 4610 PDI Studio V.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with ENGR 4610; students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4720 - Consumer Culture: What is consumer culture? What are its roots, its consequences, and alternatives? Documentaries and the research of anthropologists, historians, and religious scholars examine consumer culture in the United States and the United Kingdom including recognition of the global locations in which our consumer goods are made. Topics include buying and selling, shopping, retail, manufacture, material culture, pricing, consumer goods, disposal, kinship, identity, exchange, and advertising, with attention paid to differences in race, class, and gender.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: any 1000- OR 2000-level STS course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with STSH 4720.  Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4800 - Public Service/Professional Careers Internships: This course offers an insight into the public policy process from the vantage point of a part-time internship in the public or private sector as well as an opportunity to explore a career option before actually embarking upon it. The following is a partial list of the large number of possible internships: airport planning, architecture, banking, biological research, clinical psychology, computer science, consumer protection, corporate management, engineering, environmental planning, geology, local government, materials and mechanical engineering, noise pollution abatement, personnel management review, premedical, public finance and taxation, public health management, public relations, social work, state legislature, stock market, transportation planning, and urban planning.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: STSH 1110/STSS 1110; IHSS 1960; first year studies course or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed as STSH 4800. Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and STSH 4800.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4940 - Readings in Science and Technology Studies, Anthropology/Archaeology, History, Political Science, or Sociology: With an individual faculty member on an agreed-upon topic.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4960 - Topics in Science and Technology Studies: Credit Hours: 4
STSS 4980 - Senior Project: Ordinarily consists of independent research, supervised by a faculty member, culminating in a written thesis. A creative endeavor such as a videotape or computer program may be substituted with departmental permission. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: restricted to STS majors with senior standing. STSS Science and Technology Studies—Social Sciences credit (HSSS) (For Science and Technology Studies-Humanities credit, see STSH.)When Offered: Fall, spring, and summer terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
STSS 6010 - Concepts/Research Seminar in Science and Technology Studies: A two-semester graduate seminar designed primarily for matriculants in the departments M.S. program in Science and Technology Studies. Introduces students to the literature and the current issues in the constituent disciplines of Science and Technology Studies. Considers applications of this scholarship to current practical problems involving the human dimensions of science and technology. The first semester culminates in a bibliographic essay. In the second semester, students conduct research under the supervision of individual faculty members on topics of mutual interest.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate status or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term even-numbered yearsCredit Hours: 3
STSS 6040 - Technology Studies: The seminar examines interactions between technology and society from the vantage point of the various disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives that have contributed to technology studies. The texts, theories, and arguments that were important for the historical development of the field are covered, as well as contemporary issues. The seminar provides the resources and develops the skill needed for understanding, criticizing, constructing, and developing research in the field.When Offered: Fall term, odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
STSS 6100 - Policy Studies: An overview of the field of science and technology policy studies from various disciplinary perspectives and a survey of various policy types or arenas. The texts, theories, and arguments that were important for the historical development of the field are covered, as well as contemporary issues. The seminar provides the resources and develops the skill needed for understanding, criticizing, constructing, and developing research in the field.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
STSS 6110 - Research Methods in STS: This course offers an overview of social science techniques and research design and logistics and approaches widely used in STS.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
STSS 6120 - Advanced Research Methods: This course provides a foundation for professional-level research in science and technology studies. Through group research exercises, students explore the intersection between research issues (ethics, reliability, validity, quantification) and types of observation.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3
STSS 6200 - Science Studies: A broad survey of the field of science studies from the vantage point of various disciplinary and interdisciplinary perspectives that have contributed to the development of science studies. The texts, theories, and arguments that were important for the historical development of the field are covered, as well as contemporary issues. The seminar provides the resources and develops the skills needed for understanding, criticizing, constructing, and developing research in the field.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
STSS 6300 - Environment and Social Theory: This course focuses on contemporary social theory to understand the historical origins, institutional structures, and dominant trajectories of environmental-social change. Three main questions structure inquiry into the links among science, technology, environment, and social theory: 1) why do modern societies degrade their environments? 2) why do environmental movements arise, or what are the social structural, cultural, and political origins of environmentalism? and 3) can some particular politics curtail environmental degradation?When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
STSS 6400 - Environment and Health: This course explores how the health impacts of environmental problems are understood and responded to through medical, legal, and regulatory intervention. Case studies are used to highlight different strategies for dealing with environmental illness, comparing the perspectives of affected people, medical professionals, lawyers, government officials, industry representatives, and media. A core component of the course is devoted to problems related to exposure to toxic chemicals, including readings on popular epidemiology, mass torts, transboundary victimization, and medical rehabilitation models.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
STSS 6580 - History and Ethnography: History and Ethnography is an introductory/intermediate graduate theory and methods seminar that outfits students to undertake original empirical and interpretive work in the humanities and social sciences. The course combines historical and ethnographic approaches with discourse analysis or other qualitative analytic approaches. Such methodologies may also be mixed with quantitative approaches. There are substantial fieldwork and archival components to the course. Both historical and ethnographic methodologies provide a basis for capturing the data that provides the evidence base for analysis.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 3
STSS 6940 - Readings in Science and Technology Studies: With an individual faculty member on an agreed-upon topic.Credit Hours: 1 to 3
STSS 6960 - Topics in Science and Technology Studies: Selected topics.Credit Hours: 3
STSS 6970 - Master’s Internship: Credit Hours: 3 to 6
STSS 6990 - Master’s Thesis: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a master’s thesis. Grades of S or U are assigned by the adviser each term to reflect the  students research progress for the given semester. Once the thesis has  been presentend, approved by the adviser, and accepted by the Office of  Graduate Education, it will be archived in a standard format in the  library.Credit Hours: 1 to 9
STSS 9990 - Dissertation: Active participation in research, under the supervision of a faculty adviser, leading to a doctoral dissertation. Grades of IP are assigned until the dissertation has been publicly defended, approved by the doctoral committee, and accepted by the Office of Graduate Education to be archived in a standard format in the library. Grades will then be listed as S.Credit Hours: Up to 30
USAF 0010 - Air Force Leadership Laboratory: The leadership laboratory courses (LLABs) include a study of Air Force customs and courtesies, drill and ceremonies, and military commands. LLAB also includes studying the environment of an Air Force officer and learning about opportunities available to commissioned officers. The AS 300 and AS 400 LLABs consist of activities classified as leadership and management experiences. They involve the planning and controlling of military activities of the cadet wing, and the preparation and presentation of briefings and other oral and written communications. LLABs also include interviews, guidance, and information which will increase the understanding, motivation, and performance of other cadets.When Offered: An eight-semester (fall and spring) sequence, beginning each fall.Credit Hours: 0Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 2 contact hours
USAF 0080 - Air Force Leadership Laboratory: The leadership laboratory courses (LLABs) include a study of Air Force customs and courtesies, drill and ceremonies, and military commands. LLAB also includes studying the environment of an Air Force officer and learning about opportunities available to commissioned officers. The AS 300 and AS 400 LLABs consist of activities classified as leadership and management experiences. They involve the planning and controlling of military activities of the cadet wing, and the preparation and presentation of briefings and other oral and written communications. LLABs also include interviews, guidance, and information which will increase the understanding, motivation, and performance of other cadets.When Offered: An eight-semester (fall and spring) sequence, beginning each fall.Credit Hours: 0Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: 2 contact hours
USAF 1010 - Air and Space Studies 100A (Foundations of the U.S. Air Force): AS 100 is designed to introduce cadets to the United States Air Force and Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps. Featured topics include: mission and organization of the Air Force, officership and professionalism, military customs and courtesies, Air Force officer opportunities, and an introduction to communication skills. Leadership Laboratory is mandatory for AFROTC cadets and complements this course by providing cadets with followership experiences.When Offered: 100 A (fall term) 100 B (spring term).Credit Hours: 1
USAF 1020 - Air and Space Studies 100B (Foundations of the U.S. Air Force): AS 100 is designed to introduce cadets to the United States Air Force and Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps. Featured topics include: mission and organization of the Air Force, officership and professionalism, military customs and courtesies, Air Force officer opportunities, and an introduction to communication skills. Leadership Laboratory is mandatory for AFROTC cadets and complements this course by providing cadets with followership experiences.When Offered: 100 A (fall term) 100 B (spring term).Credit Hours: 1
USAF 2030 - Air and Space Studies 200A (The Evolution of USAF Air and Space Power): The AS 200 course is designed to examine the general aspects of air and space power through a historical perspective. Utilizing this perspective, the course covers a time period from the first balloons and dirigibles to the space-age global positioning systems of the modern day. Historical examples are provided to extrapolate the development of Air Force capabilities (competencies), and missions (functions) to demonstrate the evolution of what has become todays USAF air and space power. Furthermore, the course examines several fundamental truths associated with war in the third dimension: e.g., Principles of War and Tenets of Air and Space Power. As a whole, this course provides the cadets with an understanding for the general element and employment of air and space power, from an institutional, doctrinal, and historical perspective. In addition, the students will continue to discuss the importance of the Air Force Core Values, through the use of operational examples and historical Air Force leaders, and will continue to develop their communication skills. Leadership Laboratory is mandatory for AFROTC cadets and complements this course by providing cadets with followership experiences.When Offered: 200 A (fall term) 200 B (spring term).Credit Hours: 1
USAF 2040 - Air and Space Studies 200A (The Evolution of USAF Air and Space Power): The AS 200 is a course designed to examine the general aspects of air and space power through a historical perspective. Utilizing this perspective, the course covers a time period from the first balloons and dirigibles to the space-age global positioning systems of the modern day. Historical examples are provided to extrapolate the development of Air Force capabilities (competencies), and missions (functions) to demonstrate the evolution of what has become todays USAF air and space power. Furthermore, the course examines several fundamental truths associated with war in the third dimension: e.g., Principles of War and Tenets of Air and Space Power. As a whole, this course provides the cadets with an understanding for the general element and employment of air and space power, from an institutional, doctrinal, and historical perspective. In addition, the students will continue to discuss the importance of the Air Force Core Values, through the use of operational examples and historical Air Force leaders, and will continue to develop their communication skills. Leadership Laboratory is mandatory for AFROTC cadets and complements this course by providing cadets with followership experiences.When Offered: 200 A (fall term) 200 B (spring term).Credit Hours: 1
USAF 2050 - Air and Space Studies 300A (Air Force Leadership Studies): AS 300 is a study of leadership, management fundamentals, professional knowledge, Air Force personnel and evaluation systems, leadership ethics, and the communication skills required of an Air Force junior officer. Case studies are used to examine Air Force leadership and management situations as a means of demonstrating and exercising practical application of the concepts being studied. A mandatory Leadership Laboratory complements this course by providing advanced leadership experiences in officer-type activities, giving students the opportunity to apply the leadership and management principles of this course.When Offered: 300 A (fall term) 300 B (spring term).Credit Hours: 3
USAF 2060 - Air and Space Studies 300B (Air Force Leadership Studies): AS 300 is a study of leadership, management fundamentals, professional knowledge, Air Force personnel and evaluation systems, leadership ethics, and the communication skills required of an Air Force junior officer. Case studies are used to examine Air Force leadership and management situations as a means of demonstrating and exercising practical application of the concepts being studied. A mandatory Leadership Laboratory complements this course by providing advanced leadership experiences in officer-type activities, giving students the opportunity to apply the leadership and management principles of this course.When Offered: 300 A (fall term) 300 B (spring term).Credit Hours: 3
USAF 2070 - Air and Space Studies 400A (National Security Affairs and Preparation for Active Duty): AS 400 examines the national security process, regional studies, advanced leadership ethics, and Air Force doctrine. Special topics of interest focus on the military as a profession, officership, military justice, civilian control of the military, preparation for active duty, and current issues affecting military professionalism. Within this structure, continued emphasis is given to refining communication skills. A mandatory Leadership Laboratory complements this course by providing advanced leadership experiences, giving students the opportunity to apply the leadership and management principles of this course.When Offered: 400 A (fall term) 400 B (spring term).Credit Hours: 3
USAF 2080 - Air and Space Studies 400B (National Security Affairs and Preparation for Active Duty): AS 400 examines the national security process, regional studies, advanced leadership ethics, and Air Force doctrine. Special topics of interest focus on the military as a profession, officership, military justice, civilian control of the military, preparation for active duty, and current issues affecting military professionalism. Within this structure, continued emphasis is given to refining communication skills. A mandatory Leadership Laboratory complements this course by providing advanced leadership experiences, giving students the opportunity to apply the leadership and management principles of this course.When Offered: 400 A (fall term) 400 B (spring term).Credit Hours: 3
USAR 0010 - Fundamentals of Military Science Lab I: This course is an overview of leadership fundamentals such as setting direction, problem-solving, listening, presenting briefs, providing feedback, and using effective writing skills. Students explore dimensions of leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions in the context of practical, hands-on, and interactive exercises. Contents of the course are linked to USAR 1010.Credit Hours: 0
USAR 0020 - Fundamentals of Military Science Lab II: This course is an overview of leadership fundamentals such as setting direction, problem-solving, listening, presenting briefs, providing feedback, and using effective writing skills. Students continue to explore dimensions of leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions in the context of practical, hands-on, and interactive exercises. Contents of the course are linked to USAR 1020.Credit Hours: 0
USAR 0030 - Applied Leadership Lab I: This course explores the dimensions of creative and innovative tactical leadership strategies and styles by examining team dynamics and two historical leadership theories that form the basis of the army leadership framework. Aspects of personal motivation and team building are practice planning, executing, and assessing team exercises. Contents of the course are linked to USAR 2010.Credit Hours: 0
USAR 0040 - Applied Leadership Lab II: This course continues to explore the dimensions of creative and innovative tactical leadership strategies and styles by examining team dynamics and two historical leadership theories that form the basis of the army leadership framework. Aspects of personal motivation and team building are practice planning, executing, and assessing team exercises. Contents of the course are linked to USAR 2020.Credit Hours: 0
USAR 0050 - Applied Military Leadership Lab I: The purpose of this course is to develop basic leadership skills. The course has three objectives: teach cadets those aspects of the art of leadership and the science of warfare they will use as junior officers in the U.S. Army; prepare cadets for the Leadership Development and Assessment Course (LDAC); instill in cadets the values and ethos required to become leaders of character. Contents of the course are linked to USAR 2060.Credit Hours: 0
USAR 0060 - Applied Military Leadership Lab II: The purpose of this course is to continue development of the basic leadership skills. The course has three objectives: to teach cadets those aspects of the art of leadership and the science of warfare they will use as junior officers in the U.S. Army; to prepare cadets for the Leadership Development and Assessment Course (LDAC); to instill in cadets the values and ethos required to become leaders of character. Contents of the course are linked to USAR 2070.Credit Hours: 0
USAR 0070 - Advanced Military Management and Leadership Lab I: This course explores the dynamics of leading in the complex situations of current military operations in the Contemporary Operating Environment (COE). Students will examine differences in customs and courtesies, military law, principles of war, and rules of engagement in the face of international terrorism. Also explored are aspects of interacting with non-government organizations, civilians on the battlefield, and host nation support. The course places significant emphasis on preparing students for Basic Officer Leadership Course II and III, and for the first unit of assignment. It uses case studies, scenarios, and “What Now, Lieutenant?” exercises to prepare students to face the complex ethical and practical demands of leading as a commissioned officer in the United States Army. Cadets are responsible for planning, rehearsing, and executing all ROTC events by performing duties similar to that of officers assigned to a battalion staff. Contents of the course are linked to USAR 4010.
USAR 0080 - Advanced Military Management and Leadership Lab II: This course concentrates on leadership, management, and ethics. The course begins with a series of lessons designed to enable cadets/students to make informed decisions as they prepare for accessions into the Army. The remainder of the course concentrates on Army Operations, training management, communications, and leadership skills. Cadets are responsible for planning, rehearsing, and executing all ROTC events by performing duties similar to that of officers assigned to a battalion staff. Contents of the course are linked to USAR 4020.
USAR 1010 - Fundamentals of Military Science: The course introduces students to fundamental components of service as an officer in the United States Army. These initial lessons are the building blocks of progressive lessons in values, fitness, leadership, and officership. Students will learn how the personal development of life skills such as cultural understanding, goal setting, time management, mental/physical resiliency, and stress management relate to leadership, officership, and the Army profession. The focus is on developing basic knowledge and comprehension of Army leadership attributes and core leader competencies while gaining an understanding of the ROTC program, its purpose in the Army, and its advantages for the student.Credit Hours: 1Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Leadership Laboratories are held every week for two hours and attendance is required.  There is additional training conducted on weekends and attendance is  mandatory.
USAR 1020 - Fundamentals of Militry Science II: The course builds upon the fundamentals introduced in USAR 1010 by focusing on leadership theory and decision making. Life skills lessons in the semester include: problem solving, critical thinking, leadership theory, followership, group interaction, goal setting, and feedback mechanisms. Upon completion, students should be prepared to advance to more complex leadership instruction concerning the dynamics of organization.Credit Hours: 1Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Leadership Laboratories are held every week for two hours and attendance is required.  There is additional training conducted on weekends and attendance is  mandatory.
USAR 2010 - Applied Leadership I: The course contains the principal leadership instruction of the Basic Course. The instruction delves into several aspects of communication and leadership theory. The use of practical exercise is emphasized, as students are increasingly required to apply communications and leadership concepts. The focus continues to build on developing knowledge of the leadership attributes and core leader competencies through the understanding of Army rank, structure, and duties as well as broadening knowledge of land navigation and infantry squad tactics. Case studies will provide a tangible context for learning and understanding the Soldiers Creed and Warrior Ethos. Upon completion of this semester, students should be well grounded in the fundamental principals of leadership, and be prepared to intensify the practical application of their studies during the Advanced Course. Leadership Laboratories are held every other week for two hours, and attendance is voluntary. Actual schedule will be posted in syllabus.Credit Hours: 1Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Leadership Laboratories are held every week for two hours and attendance is required.  There is additional training conducted on weekends and attendance is  mandatory.
USAR 2020 - Applied Leadership II: The course focuses principally on officership, providing an extensive examination of the unique purpose, roles, and obligations of commissioned officers. It includes a detailed look at the origin of the Armys institutional values and their practical application in decision making and leadership. Students examine the challenges of leading teams in a complex, combat operational environment. The course highlights dimensions of terrain analysis, infantry patrols, and operation orders. Further study of the theoretical basis of the Army Leadership Requirements Model explores the dynamics of adaptive leadership in the context of military operations. This course, more than any before it, draws the various components of values, communications, decision making, and leadership together to focus on a career as a commissioned officer. Upon completion of this course, students should possess a fundamental understanding of both leadership and officership, and demonstrate the ability to apply this understanding in real-world situations.Credit Hours: 1Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Leadership Laboratories are held every week for two hours and attendance is required.  There is additional training conducted on weekends and attendance is  mandatory.
USAR 2060 - Applied Military Leadership I: In this course students will study, practice, and apply the fundamentals of Army leadership, Officership, Army values and ethics, personal development, and small unit tactics at the team and squad level. At the conclusion of this course, students will be capable of planning, coordinating, navigating, motivating, and leading a team or squad in the execution of a tactical mission during a classroom PE, a Leadership Lab, or during a Situational Training Exercise (STX) in a field environment. Successful completion of this course will help prepare students for success at the ROTC Leader Development and Assessment Course (LDAC) during the summer following the junior year. This course includes reading assignments, homework assignments, small group assignments, briefings, case studies, and practical exercises, a mid-term exam, and a final exam. Students will receive systematic and specific feedback on leader attributes values and core leader competencies from instructor and other ROTC cadre and MSL IV Cadets who will evaluate students using the ROTC Leader Development Program (LDP) model. The course closes with instruction in small unit battle drills to facilitate practical application and further leader development during labs and Situational Training Exercises.Credit Hours: 2Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Leadership Laboratories are held every week for two hours and attendance is required.  There is additional training conducted on weekends and attendance is  mandatory.
USAR 2070 - Applied Military Leadership II: The course continues to focus on doctrinal leadership and tactical operations at the small unit level. It includes opportunities to plan and conduct individual and collective skill training for military operations to gain leadership and tactical experience. The course synthesizes the various components of training, leadership, and team building. Students are required to incorporate previous military science instruction for their practical application in a performance-oriented environment. Upon completion of the course, students will possess the fundamental confidence and competence of leadership in a small unit setting and are prepared to attend the Leadership Development and Assessment Course. Credit Hours: 2Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Leadership Laboratories are held every week for two hours and attendance is required.  There is additional training conducted on weekends and attendance is  mandatory.
USAR 4010 - Advanced Military Management and Leadership I: The course concentrates on leadership, management, and ethics. The course focuses students, early in the year, on attaining knowledge and proficiency in several critical areas they will need to operate effectively as Army officers. These areas include: Coordinate Activities with Staffs, Counseling Theory and Practice within the Army Context, Training Management, and Ethics. While proficiency attained in each of these areas will initially be at the apprentice level, students will continue to sharpen these skills as they perform their roles as cadet officers within the ROTC program and after commissioning. At the end of the course, students should possess the fundamental skills, attributes, and abilities to operate as competent leaders.Credit Hours: 2Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Leadership Laboratories are held every week for two hours and attendance is required.  There is additional training conducted on weekends and attendance is  mandatory.
USAR 4020 - Advanced Military Management and Leadership II: The course focuses on completing the transition from cadet to lieutenant. As a follow-up to the ethics instruction in USAR 4010, the course starts with a foundation in the legal aspects of decision making and leadership. The curriculum reinforces previous instruction on the organization of the Army and introduces how the Army organizes for operations from the tactical to the strategic level. This is followed by instruction on administrative and logistical management that will focus on the fundamentals of soldier and unit level support. At the core of the semester is the Advanced Course Capstone Exercise. This 12-lesson exercise incorporates learning objectives from the entire military science curriculum. The capstone exercise will require students, both individually and collectively, to apply their knowledge to solve problems and confront situations commonly faced by junior officers. Upon completion of the course, students will be prepared for the responsibility of being a commissioned officer in the United States Army.Credit Hours: 2Contact, Lecture or Lab Hours: Leadership Laboratories are held every week for two hours and attendance is required.  There is additional training conducted on weekends and attendance is  mandatory.
USNA 0010 - Drill/Laboratory: Consists of one period each week lasting approximately two hours. The periods are spent conducting various activities, including military drill, athletics, lectures, and discussions on various topics of naval interest. Operating within a battalion organizational structure, students are given additional opportunities for leadership training and hands-on experience.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: an eight-semester (fall and spring) sequence, beginning each fall.Credit Hours: 0
USNA 0080 - Drill/Laboratory: Consists of one period each week lasting approximately two hours. The periods are spent conducting various activities, including military drill, athletics, lectures, and discussions on various topics of naval interest. Operating within a battalion organizational structure, students are given additional opportunities for leadership training and hands-on experience.When Offered: An eight-semester (fall and spring) sequence, beginning each fall.Credit Hours: 0
USNA 1010 - Introduction to Naval Science: The organization of the Department of Defense with emphasis on the Department of the Navy. This course provides a broad overview of all aspects of the operation and administration of today’s Navy and Marine Corps. Additionally, the course will introduce naval topics such as rank structure, naval etiquette, naval history, naval warfare platforms and missions as well as basic naval leadership principles. The course will also cover basic military conduct and NROTC rules and regulations. Finally, the course will look at the role of the U.S. military in today’s ever changing geopolitical climates and global conflicts.Credit Hours: 3
USNA 2020 - Sea Power and Maritime Affairs: A study in the development of the United States Navy and Marine Corps throughout the history of the United States. This course treats the broad principles, concepts, and elements of seapower with historical and modern applications to the United States and other world powers.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
USNA 2030 - Naval Leadership and Management I: Comprehensive study of organization, leadership, and management with emphasis on the naval organization. Survey of the management process. Introduction to individual and small group behavior, decision making, responsibility, authority, and accountability. Extensive study of motivation, leadership, and communication. Application explored by case study and seminar discussions.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
USNA 2040 - Naval Ships Systems I: A familiarization course in naval engineering. Study of types, structure, and purpose of naval ships. Elements of ship design to achieve safe operations and ship stability characteristics are examined. Ship compartmentation, propulsion systems, auxiliary power systems, ship control systems, and elements of damage control are included.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
USNA 2050 - Navigation: The principles and procedures of ship navigation, movements, and employment. Course includes piloting, mathematical analysis, spherical triangulation, navigational aids, tides and currents, electronic navigation, and rules of the nautical road.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3
USNA 2060 - Naval Operations: An introduction to the complexities of modern naval operations. Course emphasis includes fleet communications and communication security, naval tactics, relative motion, maneuvering board, and ship operations and control.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
USNA 2070 - Naval Ships Systems II: The study of weapons systems and the theoretical concepts underlying the design and operation of those systems. Includes sensor and detection subsystems, tracking systems, propulsion and guidance systems, launching systems, fire control problem solutions, and systems integration. In-depth analysis of representative, state-of the- art weapons systems in use today.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 3



USNA 2150 - Evolution of Warfare: A study of the forms of warfare practiced throughout history with the emphasis on those of the Middle East and Western Europe. Selected battles, strategy, formations, and commanders are studied from the times of the pharaohs to the present. The moral, ethical, and cultural attitudes of the times are brought into the course so that the student may understand how they influenced warfare and in turn were influenced by warfare.When Offered: Spring term odd-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3*
USNA 2170 - Amphibious Warfare: The science of amphibious operations, emphasizing tactical and logistical planning and the coordination required of joint forces. The case study approach is used, with each operation being analyzed as to its strengths and weaknesses and the lessons learned, which were applied to subsequent operations.When Offered: Spring term even-numbered years.Credit Hours: 3**
USNA 2940 - Readings in Naval Science: An individually arranged independent study course under supervision of a member of the Naval Science Department.Credit Hours: 1 to 3
USNA 4190 - Naval Leadership and Ethics: The capstone course of the NROTC academic syllabus, providing a study of personal and professional military ethics and Navy/Marine Corps junior officer leadership and administration. Presents leadership and ethical dilemmas in case study and small group discussion format. The course also exposes the student to a study of counseling methods, military justice administration, human resources management, directives and correspondence, personnel management, and career development.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: USNA 1010, USNA 2020, USNA 2030, USNA 2040, USNA 2050, USNA 2060, USNA 2070.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
WRIT 1110 - Writing for Classroom and Career: This course emphasizes written, visual, and oral communication strategies that will help students succeed in both academic and professional contexts. Principal assignments are based on types of writing required in school and on the job: reporting, evaluating, taking a position, and making a proposal (orally and in writing). Written assignments will include visual elements such as headings, charts/graphs, and page or screen design. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 1960 - Topics in Writing: Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 2110 - Rhetoric and Writing: This course aims to increase students ability to develop ideas and to express them effectively. It gives special attention to expository and persuasive writing. Study of rhetorical theory and critical reading of speeches and/or essays help the students to understand the rhetorical process, to analyze the audience, and to foresee its response. A substantial amount of writing is required. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall and spring terms annually.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 2310 - Creative Writing: Short Story: This course is for students with little or no previous creative writing experience. Readings introduce traditional, modern, and post-modern poetic practice emphasizing imagery, figurative language, voice, line, and other formal aspects of poetry. Notebooks track development of student writing from reading exemplary texts to drafting revision of original poems. Writing workshop format includes analysis of published poems and peer discussion and critique of student work. For final projects, students create chapbooks, thematically sequenced poetry collections. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 2320 - Creative Non-Fiction: This is a workshop course in which novice and more experienced student writers produce creative nonfiction-prose that aims to be both factually accurate and compelling literature. Focus may vary by semester among memoir, lyric and personal essays, plotted narrative, oral history, and nature writing. For models, students study classic and contemporary accomplished writers who connect the self to the larger world. Class work centers on drafting and revising essays, with regular peer workshops. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 2330 - Creative Writing:  The Short Story: A workshop course in reading and writing varied forms of short narrative and non-narrative prose fiction. This course will focus on reading and analyzing exemplary short fiction and writing and revising original work. Students learn to develop plot, character, setting, point of view, style, and theme, and use description effectively to invent and shape narrative strategies. Peer reading and writing groups offer opportunities for shared response and critique. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Upon availability of instructor.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 2340 - Speech Communication: This course focuses on developing public speaking skills and critical listening abilities. Guided by rhetorical theory, theories of persuasion, and argumentation theory, students prepare several oral presentations, engage in extemporaneous speaking exercises, and criticize other performances. This is a communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall term annually.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 2960 - Topics in Writing: Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 4160 - Writing about Science: This course introduces students to a set of principles that can guide their print and multimedia communication with readers who are not specialists in a particular scientific or technical field but who are affected by developments in those fields. Students will learn to use these principles in analyzing exemplary texts as well as in creating their own work. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisites: successful completion of any 1000- or 2000-level WRIT course or junior or senior status.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with WRIT 6160.  Students cannot received credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 4170 - Writing for Promotion and Marketing: This course engages students in persuasive and information writing designed to promote skills, products, services, or concepts. Writers craft such texts and materials as: application essays, news releases, advertising copy, newsletters, oral presentations, marketing plans, and Web sites and other e-materials. Coursework will emphasize the fundamentals of good writing based on audience and context analysis, and on basic understanding of branding and marketing communication options. Restricted to EMAC and COMM majors. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: WRIT 1110, WRIT 2110, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 4410 - Research Writing: In this class,students will write on topics fromtheir major discipline and investigate the kinds of texts that professionals intheir field produce. They willl identify and explore research questions, use discipline-specific library databases, and write research reports. In addition,they will develop effective note-taking and research skills and learn strategies for effective prose style. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite:  One other WRIT or COMM course or one other communication-intensive course.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with WRIT 6410.  Student cannot obtain credit for this course and WRIT 6410.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 4550 - Proposing and Persuading: Make things happen: start a business, raise funds, solicit work, support research, win a place on a conference program, take initiative, change the way things are done around here. This course will teach students how to write proposals that persuade. Students will learn to turn situations into occasions for proposing, write a variety of proposals, locate Request for Proposals, develop a workplan for feasible projects that come in on-time and on-budget, use networks to strengthen proposals, detail a budget, and edit for clarity and grace. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate standing or successful completion of a WRIT 1110, WRIT 2110, or permission of instructor.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with WRIT 6550. Students may not receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 4960 - Topics in Writing: Credit Hours: 4
WRIT 6160 - Writing about Science: This course introduces students to a set of principles that can guide their print and multimedia communication with readers who are not specialists in a particular scientific or technical field but who are affected by developments in those fields. Students will learn to use these principles in analyzing exemplary texts as well as in creating their own work.When Offered: Spring term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with WRIT 4160.  Students cannot obtain credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3
WRIT 6170 - Writing for Promotion and Marketing: This course engages students in persuasive and information writing designed to promote skills, products, services or concepts. Writers craft such texts and materials as: application essays, news releases, advertising copy, newsletters, oral presentations, marketing plans, and Web sites and other e-materials. Coursework will emphasize the fundamentals of good writing based on audience and context analysis, and on a basic understanding of branding and marketing communication options. Restricted to EMAC and COMM majors. This is a communication-intensive course.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: permission of instructor.When Offered: Spring term annually.Credit Hours: 3
WRIT 6410 - Research Writing: In this class, students will write on topics from their major discipline and investigate the kinds of texts that professionals in the field produce. They will identify and explore research questions, use discipline-specific library databases, and write research reports. In addition, students will develop effective note-taking and research skills and learn strategies for effective prose style.When Offered: Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with WRIT 4410.  Students cannot obtain credit for both this course and WRIT 4410.Credit Hours: 3
WRIT 6550 - Proposing and Persuading: Make things happen: start a business, raise funds, solicit work, support research, win a place on a conference program, take initiative, change the way things are done around here. This course will teach students how to write proposals that persuade. They will learn to turn situations into occasions for proposing, write a variety of proposals, locate Request for Proposals, develop a work-plan for feasible projects that come in on time and on budget, use networks to strengthen proposals, detail a budget, and edit for clarity and grace.Prerequisites/Corequisites: Prerequisite: graduate standing or successful completion of a writing course.When Offered:  Fall term annually.Cross Listed: Cross listed with WRIT 4550. Students may not receive credit for both courses.Credit Hours: 3



